---
country: "india"
university: "a-p-j-abdul-kalam-technological-university"
branch: "mca-integrated"
version: "2020"
semester: 6
course_code: "20INMCA310"
course_title: "mini-project-1"
language: "english"
contributor: "@geogeorge46"
---

# 20INMCA310 Mini Project 1

The mini project is designed to develop practical ability and knowledge about tools/techniques in order to solve the actual problems related to the industry, academic institutions, or similar areas.

## Course Outcomes
After the completion of the course the student will be able to:

- **CO 1** Practice acquired knowledge within the chosen area of technology for project.  
- **CO 2** Identify, discuss and justify the technical aspects of the chosen project with a comprehensive and systematic approach.  
- **CO 3** Reproduce, improve and refine technical aspects for engineering projects.  
- **CO 4** Work as an individual or in a team in development of technical projects.  
- **CO 5** Communicate and report effectively project-related activities and findings.

## Syllabus

Students can take up any application level/system level experimental design/implementation tasks of relatively minor intensity and scope as compared to the major-project, pertaining to a relevant domain of study. Projects can be chosen either from the list provided by the faculty or in the field of interest of the student.  

At the end of each phase, presentation and demonstration of the project should be conducted, which will be evaluated by a panel of examiners.  

A detailed project report duly approved by the guide in the prescribed format should be submitted by the student for final evaluation.  

Students as individuals or a team of maximum 4 members may be entrusted with providing solutions to similar problems.  

Mini project will give an opportunity for the students to prepare for the main project and to achieve some of the objectives of the main project. This can also be used as an opportunity for producing and distributing socially useful software.

## Internal Continuous Assessment (100 marks)
- **10% (10 marks)** - Project Synopsis / Proposal Evaluation  
- **20% (20 marks)** - 1st Interim Project Evaluation  
- **20% (20 marks)** - 2nd Interim Project Evaluation  
- **50% (50 marks)** - End Semester Internal Project & Project Report Evaluation and Evaluation by Guide
