---
country: "india"
university: "a-p-j-abdul-kalam-technological-university"
branch: "mca-integrated"
version: "2020"
semester: 6
course_code: "20inmca334"
course_title: "visual-programming-lab"
language: "english"
contributor: "@geogeorge46"
---

# 20INMCA334 VISUAL PROGRAMMING LAB

The syllabus is prepared with the view of preparing the MCA Graduates capable of writing visual basic programs to create software interface and codes in an easy way to use a graphical environment.

## Course Outcomes
After the completion of the course the student will be able to:

- **CO 1:** Understand and explain the concepts of GUI and various VB editions  
- **CO 2:** Analyse and evaluate the use of various datatypes, also, practice decision structures and loop structures for determining different operations and to perform repetitive tasks  
- **CO 3:** Analyse and implement arrays, procedures and functions  
- **CO 4:** Construct and debug Visual Basic applications using various controls  
- **CO 5:** Construct and Deploy menu applications  

## Syllabus

### Module 1 (4 hrs)
- **1.1** Event driven programming: Concept of GUI, Various VB- Editions (2 hrs)  
- **1.2** How to start with a project, Introduction of various windows: Properties of Windows, Project Windows, Toolbox Windows, Menu bar, Windows (2 hrs)  

### Module 2 (8 hrs)
- **2.1** Variables and constants: data types, declaration, Operators (2 hrs)  
- **2.2** Program flow-Decision statements – if... Then, if... Then... else, select...case (3 hrs)  
- **2.3** Loop statements – while… end while, do. .loop, for…next, for…each... next (3 hrs)  

### Module 3 (12 hrs)
- **3.1** Single dimensional, Multidimensional arrays (4 hrs)  
- **3.2** Control Structures (4 hrs)  
- **3.3** Procedures and functions (4 hrs)  

### Module 4 (12 hrs)
- **4.1** Windows programming: Creating windows Forms, windows controls - Button, Check box, Combo box, Label, List box, Radio Button, Text box (5 hrs)  
- **4.2** Events – Click, close, Deactivate, Load, Mouse move, Mouse down, and Mouse Up (7 hrs)  

### Module 5 (12 hrs)
- **5.1** Creating menus, menu items (3 hrs)  
- **5.2** Modifying the existing menu, assigning and removing shortcut keys (4 hrs)  
- **5.3** Creating a simple menu application  

## Reference Books
1. C.Komalavalli, Sanjib K Sahu, *Essentials of .Net Programming Theory and Application*, Ane Books Pvt. Ltd, 2016.  
2. Clayton E. Crooks, *Learning Visual Basic.NET Through Applications*, First Edition, Hingham, Mass: Charles River Media, 2003.  
3. Shirish Chavan, *Visual Basic .NET*, First Edition, Pearson Educations, 2004.  
4. Steven Holzner, *Visual Basic .NET Programming. Black Book*, New Edition, Dreamtech Press, 2005.  

## Continuous Internal Evaluation Pattern
- **Attendance:** 08 Marks  
- **Continuous Assessment Test (2 numbers):** 30 Marks  
- **Assignment/Quiz/Course project:** 12 Marks  

## End Semester Examination Pattern
- Lab exam will be conducted by an internal examiner
