---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "cse"
scheme: "2024"
semester: 1
course_code: "EST100"
course_title: "Engineering Graphics And Computer Aided Drawing"
language: "english"
contributor: "@HAM-2K5"
---

# GMEST103: Engineering Graphics And Computer Aided Drawing

## Course Objectives
1. To learn the principles and techniques of dimensioning and preparing engineering drawings.  
2. To develop the ability to accurately interpret and understand engineering drawings.  
3. To learn the features of CAD software.  

## Course Modules

### Module 1: Introduction & Projections of Lines
- Relevance of technical drawing in engineering field.  
- Types of lines, Dimensioning, BIS code of practice. *(No end-semester exam questions)*  
- Projection of points in different quadrants.  
- Projection of straight lines inclined to one plane and both planes.  
- True length and true inclinations of line.  
 

---

### Module 2: Projection of Solids
- Projection of simple solids (Prisms, Pyramids, Cone, Cylinder).  
- Projection of solids in simple position including profile view.  
- Solids with axis inclined to one or both reference planes.  


---

### Module 3: Sections & Development of Solids
- Sections of solids: Prisms, Pyramids, Cone, Cylinder.  
- True shape of the sections. *(Exclude true-shape given problems)*  
- Development of surfaces of solids & those cut by section planes. *(Exclude through holes)*  

---

### Module 4: Isometric Projection & CAD
- Isometric scale, isometric view and projections of Prisms, Pyramids, Cone, Cylinder, Sphere, Hemisphere, and combinations.  
- Introduction to CAD: Role in design and product development.  
- Advantages of CAD.  
- Creating 2D drawings with dimensions using software. *(CAD only for internal evaluation)*  

---
## References
- Varghese, P. I., Engineering Graphics, V I P Publishers, 2018 edn

- Benjamin, J., Engineering Graphics, Pentex Publishers, 2016 edn

- John, K. C., Engineering Graphics, Prentice Hall India Publishers, 2017 edn

- Bhatt, N. D., Engineering Drawing, Charotar Publishing House Pvt. Ltd., 60th edn, 2019

- Anilkumar, K. N., Engineering Graphics, Adhyuth Narayan Publishers, 2022 edn

---