---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "mca"
version: "2019"
semester: 3
course_code: "RLMCA201"
course_title: "Computer Networks"
language: "english"
contributor: "@swaminadhan"
---

# RLMCA201: Computer Networks

## Course Objectives

- To introduce students to modern computer networks
- To lay foundation for internet technologies and related topics


### Module - 1 

-Basic communications model - Protocol layers and service
models - Basic definitions - OSI model - Internet protocols,
the role of standards organizations, History of Internet,
Security in the Internet, concept of Quality of Service
(QoS).

### Module - 2 

-Application layer protocols - Client-server as a key model -
Network application architecture, Web, HTTP, FTP, SMTP,
POP3, and DNS, Peer-to-peer file sharing networks,
Introduction to Sockets programming

### Module - 3

-Transport Layer Protocols:Introduction to transport layer,
Multiplexing and demultiplexing, Principles of Reliable data
transfer - Stop-and-wait and Go-back- N design and
evaluation, Connection oriented transport TCP, Connection
less transport UDP, Principles of congestion control -
efficiency and fairness.

### Module - 4

-Network Layer Protocols:virtual circuits and datagrams,
Principles of routing, internet protocol Ipv4 and Ipv6,
Routing algorithms:Link-state and distance vector routing,
Routing on the internet RIP OSPF and BGP, Multicast
routing.

### Module - 5

-Link layer and Physical Layer:Introduction to link layer -
Error detection (parity, checksum, and CRC), Multiple
access protocols (collision and token based), IEEE 802.3
Ethernet, Switching and bridging, Media, Signal strength
and interference. Data encoding.

### Module - 6

-IEEE 802.11 Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, and cellular networks,
Threats and attacks, Firewalls, VPNs, Introduction to
network management, SNMP, Overview of tools and
troubleshooting, Traffic analysis tools and Configuration
management. 

## References

-Behrouz A Forouzan, Firouz Mosharraf, “Computer Networks:A top down Approach”,
McGraw Hill Education, 1st Edition (2011).
-James F Kurose and Keith W Ross, “Computer Networking:A Top - Down Approach”,
Pearson Education; 5th Edition (2012).
-Kevin R. Fall, W. Richard Stevens, “TCP/IP Illustrated, Volume 1 -The Protocols”,
Pearson Education, 2nd Edition (2014).
-Uyless Black, “Computer Networks:Protocols, Standards and Interface”, Prentice Hall
India Learning Private Limited, 8th Edition (2015)
-William Stallings, “Foundations of Modern Networking:SDN, NFV, QoE, IoT,and
Cloud”, Pearson Education, 1st Edition (2016). 



