---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "mca"
version: "2019"
semester: 3
course_code: "RLMCA205"
course_title: "Database Management Systems"
language: "english"
contributor: "@swaminadhan"
---

# RLMCA203:Database Management Systems

## Course Objectives

-  To develop and manage efficient and effective database applications that requires
 understanding the fundamentals of database management systems, techniques for the
 design of databases, and principles of database administration.



### Module - 1 

-Introduction:Purpose of database systems - View of data - Data
models, schemas and instances - Database Languages - Database
Users and Administrators.
Data modeling using Entity Relationship Model - Entity sets,
Relationship sets, attributes, Constraints – Keys – Entity -
Relationship Diagrams - Weak Entity Sets.
Extended E-R features - Specialization and Generalization -
Constraints on Specialization and Generalization

### Module - 2 

-The Relational model:Relational model concepts - Relational
model constraints - Relational Databases and Relational
Database Schemas.
Relational Query Languages :The Relational Algebra -
Examples of Queries in Relational Algebra

### Module - 3

-Introduction to SQL:SQL Data Definition, Basic structure of
SQL Queries, Additional Basic Operations, Set Operations, Null
values, Aggregate functions, Nested Subqueries, Modifications
of database
Intermediate SQL:JOIN Expressions, Views, Transactions,
Integrity Constraints, SQL Data types and schemas,
Authorisation.
Advanced SQL:Declaring and Invoking SQL Functions and
Procedures, Triggers - Need for triggers, Triggers in SQL

### Module - 4

-Database Design:Functional Dependencies - Normal Forms:
First Normal Form, Second Normal Form, Third Normal Form,
Boyce Codd Normal Form, Multivalued Dependency and Fourth
Normal Form, Join Dependencies and Fifth Normal Form.
Inference Rules for Functional Dependencies, Minimal Sets of
Functional Dependencies, Properties of Relational
Decompositions.

### Module - 5

-Foundations of Database Transaction Processing:Transactions,
Database Items, Read and Write Operations and DBMS buffers,
Transaction states, Desirable states of Transactions,
Transactions and Schedules - Characterising Schedules based
on Recoverability, Schedules of Transactions, Characterising
Schedules Based on Recoverability, Characterising Schedules
Based on Serializability, Serial, Non serial , and ConflictSerializable Schedules, Testing for Conflict Serializability of a
Schedule, View Equivalence and View Serializability.
Concurrency Control in databases:Two - Phase Locking
Techniques, Guaranteeing Serializability by Two-Phase
Locking, Dealing with Deadlock and Starvation, Concurrency
Control Based on Timestamp Ordering


### Module - 6

-Overview of Data Mining and Data Warehousing Concepts -
Data mining Technology, Association rules, Classifications,
Clustering, Introduction of Data Warehousing - Characteristics
of Data Warehouses, Data Modeling for Data Warehouses

## References

-Abraham Silberschatz ,Henry F. Korth ,S. Sudarshan, ”Database System Concepts”,
McGraw Hill Education, 6th Edition (2013) - (for Modules 1,2,3 ).
-Ashutosh Kumar Dubay, “Database Management Concepts”, S.K. Kataria & Sons, 1st
Edition (2012).
-Raghu Ramakrishnan and Johannes Gehrke, “Database Management Systems”, McGraw
Hill, 3rd Edition (2014)
-Ramez Elmasri, Shamkant B.Navathe, “Database Systems “, Pearson Education, 6th
Edition (2013) (for Modules 4,5,6).
-Thomas M Connolly and Carolyn E Begg, “Database systems”, Pearson Education, 4th
Edition (2009) - (for Module 4).

