---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "mca"
version: "2019"
semester: 3
course_code: "RLMCA233"
course_title: "Web Programming Lab"
language: "english"
contributor: "@swaminadhan"
---

# RLMCA233: Web Programming Lab   

## Course Objectives

- To practice the concepts & syntax learned in the course RL1MCA305 
- To understand and practice markup languages.
- To understand and practice embedded dynamic scripting on client side Internet
 Programming.
- To understand and practice web development techniques on client-side
- To understand and practice server-side scripting.


### Exercises
1. Create a web page with the following using HTML5
(i) To embed an image map in a web page
(ii) To fix the hot spots
(iii) Show all the related information when the hot spots are clicked.
2. Create a web page with all types of Cascading style sheets.
3. Implement Client Side Scripts for Validating Web Form Controls using
 JavaScript.
4. Designing Quiz Application Personal Information System using JavaScript
5. Develop PHP program using Arrays, control structures, looping structures
 and Form Handling
6. Implement Web applications using HTML and JSP/PHP/ASP and deploy.
7. Using PHP and MySQL, develop a program to accept book information viz.
 Accession number, title, authors, edition and publisher from a web page and
 store the information in a database and to search for a book with the title
 specified by the user and to display the search results with proper headings.
7. Develop a web application for Airline Reservation System using PHP 
8. Programs for creating dynamic and interactive web pages using forms.
9. Test the application on an Application Server

## References

-Text Books prescribed for theory course ‘RLMCA305 Web Programming'.


