---
country: "india"
university: "a-p-j-abdul-kalam-technological-university"
branch: "mca-integrated"
version: "2020"
semester: 5
course_code: "20INMCA509"
course_title: "mini-project-2"
language: "english"
contributor: "@geogeorge46"
---

# 20INMCA509 - MINI PROJECT 2

The mini project is designed to develop practical ability and knowledge about tools/techniques to solve actual problems related to industry, academic institutions, or similar areas.

## Course Outcomes
After the completion of the course, the student will be able to:

- **CO 1:** Identify the requirements for real-world problems.  
- **CO 2:** Demonstrate an ability to work in teams and manage the conduct of the research study.  
- **CO 3:** Conduct a survey of several available literatures in the preferred field of study.  
- **CO 4:** Perform analysis on the reviewed literatures and derive conclusions.  
- **CO 5:** Report and present the findings of the study conducted in the preferred domain.  
- **CO 6:** Inculcate innovative thinking and thereby prepare students for the main project.

## Syllabus
- Students can take up any application-level/system-level experimental design/implementation tasks of relatively minor intensity of research and scope compared to the major project.  
- They will carry out literature surveys in a selected area, prepare a review paper, and a working prototype of a computational system.  
- At the end of each phase, presentation and demonstration of the project should be conducted, which will be evaluated by a panel of examiners.  
- A detailed project report duly approved by the guide in the prescribed format should be submitted by the student for final evaluation.  
- Publishing the work in Conference Proceedings/Journals with National/International status with the consent of the guide will carry additional weightage in the review process.

## Internal Continuous Assessment (100 marks)
- 10% (10) - Project Synopsis / Proposal Evaluation  
- 20% (20) - 1st Interim Project Evaluation (Literature Review)  
- 20% (20) - 2nd Interim Project Evaluation (Implementation & Analysis using any Software Tool)  
- 50% (50) - End Semester Internal Project & Project Report Evaluation and Evaluation by Guide
