---
university: "ktu"
branch: "mechanical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 4
course_code: "met206"
course_title: "fluid-machinery"
language: "english"
contributor: "@AkhilaSunesh"
---

# MET206: Fluid Machinery

## Course Outcomes

After completion of the course the student will be able to:

* CO1 Explain the characteristics of centrifugal and reciprocating pumps  
* CO2 Calculate forces and work done by a jet on fixed or moving plate and curved plates  
* CO3 Explain the working of turbines and Select a turbine for specific application.  
* CO4 Analyse the working of air compressors and Select the suitable one based on application.  
* CO5 Analyse gas turbines and Identify the improvements in basic gas turbine cycles.  
* CO6 Explain the characteristics of centrifugal and reciprocating pumps  

## Syllabus

### Module 1
Impact of jets: Introduction to hydrodynamic thrust of jet on a fixed and moving surface (flat and curve),– Series of vanes - work done and efficiency. Hydraulic Turbines : Impulse and Reaction Turbines – Degree of reaction – Pelton Wheel – Constructional features - Velocity triangles – Euler’s equation – Speed ratio, jet ratio and work done, losses and efficiencies, design of Pelton wheel – Inward and outward flow reaction turbines- Francis Turbine – Constructional features – Velocity triangles, work done and efficiencies.  Axial flow turbine (Kaplan) Constructional features – Velocity triangles-  work done and efficiencies.

### Module 2
Characteristic curves of turbines – theory of draft tubes – surge tanks – Cavitation in turbines – Governing of turbines – Specific speed of turbine , Type Number– Characteristic curves, scale  Laws – Unit speed – Unit discharge and  unit power. Rotary motion of liquids – free, forced and spiral vortex flows Rotodynamic pumps- centrifugal pump impeller types,-velocity triangles manometric head- work, efficiency and losses, H-Q characteristic, typical flow system characteristics, operating point of a pump. Cavitation in centrifugal pumps- NPSH required and available- Type number-Pumps in series and parallel operations. Performance characteristics- Specific speed-Shape numbers – Impeller shapes based on shape numbers.

### Module 3
Positive displacement pumps- reciprocating pump – Single acting and double acting- slip, negative slip and work required and efficiency- indicator diagram- acceleration head - effect of acceleration and friction on indicator diagram – speed calculation- Air vessels and their purposes, saving in work done to air vessels multi cylinder pumps. Multistage pumps-selection of pumps pumping devices-hydraulic ram, Accumulator, Intensifier, Jet pumps, gear pumps, vane pump and lobe pump. vane compressor, screw compressor.

### Module 4
Compressors: classification of compressors, reciprocating compressor-single stage compressor, equation for work with and without clearance volume, efficiencies, multistage compressor, intercooler, free air delivered (FAD). Centrifugal compressor-working, velocity diagram, work done, power required, width of blades of impeller and diffuser, isentropic efficiency, slip factor and pressure coefficient, surging and chocking. Axial flow compressors:- working, velocity diagram, degree  of reaction, performance. Roots blower.

### Module 5
Gas turbines: classification, Thermodynamic analysis of gas turbine cycles-open, closed and semi closed cycle; ideal working cycle- Brayton cycle-P-v and T-s diagram, thermal efficiency. Effect of compressor and turbine efficiencies. Optimum pressure ratio for maximum specific work output with and without considering machine efficiencies. Comparison of gas turbine and IC engines, Analysis of open cycle gas turbine, Improvements of the basic gas turbine cycles-regeneration, intercooling and reheating-cycle efficiency and work output-Condition for minimum compressor work and maximum turbine work. Combustion chambers for gas turbines. pressure loss in combustion process and stability loop.

## Text Books
* Subramanya, K., Hydraulic Machines, Tata McGraw Hill, 1st edition, 2017  
* Rathore, M., Thermal Engineering, Tata McGraw Hill, 1st edition, 2010  

## Reference Books
* Ganesan, V., Gas Turbines, Tata McGraw Hill, 3rd edition, 2017.  
* Sawhney G.S., Thermal and Hydraulic Machines, Prentice Hall India Learning Private Limited; 2nd edition, 2011  
