---
university: "ktu"
branch: "mechanical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 6
course_code: "met296"
course_title: "materials-in-manufacturing-honors"
language: "english"
contributor: "@AkhilaSunesh"
---

# MET296: Materials in Manufacturing (Honors)

## Preamble

Understanding of the correlation between the chemical bonds and crystal structure of metallic materials to their mechanical properties.  
Recognize the importance of deformation of metals at high temperature.  
Enrich knowledge of various behavior and property changes inside the material structure in raised temperature and methods to strengthening the material.  
Provide in-depth proficiency in material science and engineering fields for elevated temperature applications.  

**Prerequisite:** MET 202 - Metallurgy and Material Science  

## Course Outcomes

At the end of the course students will be able to:

* **CO1** Understand the chemical bonds, crystal structures and their relationship with the properties.  
* **CO2** Correlate structure and properties relationship for high temperature applications.  
* **CO3** Understand the attributes and purity obtainable through triple vacuum induction melting process.  
* **CO4** To have knowledge in improving material strength against high temperature environment and predict life time.  
* **CO5** Understand the properties of super alloys and its strengthening processes.  

## Syllabus

### Module - 1

Atomic structure- chemical bonds-crystallography-miller indices - slip - dislocation - crystallization - frank-reed source - Structural parameters in high-temperature deformed metals - dislocation structure - distances between dislocations in sub-boundaries - sub-boundaries as dislocation sources and obstacles - dislocations inside sub-grains - vacancy loops and helicoids - structural peculiarities of high temperature deformation.  

### Module - 2

Characteristics of high-temperature materials - The super alloys as high-temperature materials - The requirement: the gas turbine engine - Larson–Miller approach for the ranking of creep performance - development of the super alloys - Nickel as a high-temperature material: justification - super alloy production methods: vacuum induction melting (VIM), vacuum arc remelting (VAR), VIM, electroslag remelting (ESR), VIM, ESR, VAR - Freckles, three rings, white spot - cleanliness.  

### Module - 3

Superalloys: metallurgy, characteristics - wrought, cast superalloys, properties - crystal structures, phases in superalloys, Iron-Nickel-base superalloys, Nickel-base superalloys, Cobalt-base superalloys - elements causing brittle phase formation, detrimental tramp elements, elements producing oxidation and hot corrosion resistance - microstructure, gamma prime, gamma double prime, Carbide and Boride phases, strengthening mechanisms - Heat treatment.  

### Module - 4

Single-crystal super alloys for blade applications: solidification, heat transfer, defects - mechanical behavior, performance in creep, fatigue - Titanium: binary phase diagram - production of ingot - forgings - shear bands - pickling - Ti alloys - machining and welding of Titanium - Heat Treatment - properties of titanium aluminides - Niobium: production of niobium - niobium in steel making – niobium alloys characteristics and applications - Niobium products for the superalloy industry.  

### Module - 5

Molybdenum: Ferromolybdenum - production of molybdenum – properties - effect of molybdenum alloying – applications - TZM, TZC - Maraging steel: reaction in austenite - austenite to martensite transformation - reaction in martensite - time of maraging - precipitate size - fracture toughness - welding and ageing attributes - superior features - applications - cobalt free maraging steel - intermetallics: phase diagrams - Hume-Rothery phases - structures of MgCu2, MgZn2, MgNi2.  

## References

1. Callister William. D., Material Science and Engineering, John Wiley, 2014  
2. Matthew J. Donachie, Stephen J. Donachie, Super alloys A Technical Guide, Second Edition, 2002, ASM International  
3. Barrett, C. S. and Massalski, T. B., Structure of metals, Third edition, McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1966  
4. Decker, Raymond Frank, Source book on maraging steels: A comprehensive collection of outstanding articles from the periodical and reference literature, American Society for Metals, 1979  
5. Gerd Lutjering, James C. Williams, Titanium, Springer  
6. Roger C. Reed, The Super alloys Fundamentals and Applications, Cambridge University Press  
7. Valim Levitin, High temperature strain of metals and alloys - physical fundamentals, Wiley VCH, 2006  
8. https://www.phase-trans.msm.cam.ac.uk/teaching.html  
