---
country: "india"
university: "calicut-university"
branch: "computer-applications"
version: "2024"
semester: 1
course_code: "bca1cj103"
course_title: "discrete-structures-for-computer-applications"
language: "english"
contributor: "@SyedFaseeh7"
---

# BCA1CJ103: Discrete Structures for Computer Applications

## Course Objectives
* Provide a foundational understanding of essential concepts fundamental to computer science and mathematics.
* Explore topics related to Propositional Logic, Sets and Relations, Graphs, and Trees.
* Equip students with the analytical and problem-solving skills necessary for applications in computer science and algorithm design.

## Course Outcomes
* **CO 1:** Acquire a comprehensive understanding of propositional logic and its applications, with a focus on constructing and interpreting truth tables.
* **CO 2:** Proficiently define and manipulate sets, analyse relations and functions and their representation by Venn diagrams.
* **CO 3:** Acquire a basic understanding of graph theory including representations, types of graphs, their properties such as connectivity, cycles, paths and degrees.
* **CO 4:**  Demonstrate a deep understanding of advanced graph theory concepts, focusing on Euler's graph, Hamiltonian graphs, Isomorphism and Homeomorphism.
* **CO 5:** Proficiently understand the tree data structures, spanning trees and associated algorithms for solving problems such as Prim's and Kruskal.
* **CO 6:**  Represent various mathematical problems using algorithmic approaches and enhance problem-solving skills by visualizing solutions through the utilization of software tools.

## Course Content

### Module - 1 (Mathematical Logic)
* Propositional Logic: Definition, Logical Operators (Negation, Disjunction, Conjunction, Implication, Biconditional), Truth Table.
* Laws of Logic: Tautology, Contradiction, Contingency, Logical equivalence.
* Algebra of Propositions, Solving logic with and without truth table.
* Validity of Arguments, Logical implication.
* Quantifiers: Universal and Existential.

### Module - 2 (Set Theory and Relations)
* Set Theory: Definition, Concept of Set Theory, Cardinality, Types of sets.
* Properties of Set: Subsets, Power set, Venn Diagrams, Set operations, Partition.
* Relation: Definition and Examples, Type of Relations with example.
* Equivalence relation, Equivalence Class and Di-Graph.
* Functions: Introduction, type of function, Composition function, One-to-one function, Onto function, One-to-one correspondence.

### Module - 3 (Introduction to Graphs)
* Graph: Definition, Properties of Graph, Simple Graph, Regular Graph, Null Graph, Subgraph and Isomorphism.
* Walk, Path, Trail, Circuit, Cycle, Complete Graph, Hand-Shaking Theorem.
* Connected Graph, Complete Graph, Euler Graph, Hamiltonian graph, Travelling Sales Man Problem, Operations on Graph, Homeomorphism.
* Planar Graph, Kuratowski's two graph, Matrix Representation of Graph.
* Bi-Partite Graph, Graph colouring, Chromatic number.

### Module - 4 (Trees and Applications)
* Trees: Definition, Properties, Pendant vertex, Distance, Eccentricity and Center of Trees.
* Rooted Trees, Binary Trees and Its Properties[cite: 500].
* Minimum Spanning Tree: Definition, Prim's Algorithm and Kruskal's Algorithm (Algorithm and Problem Based).
* Cut-Set and Cut-Vertices, Connectivity of Graph and Weighted Graph.

### Module - 5 (Open-Ended Module - Application Level)
* Discussion on topics from: First Order Logic, Application of Logic in Intelligence System, Set theory in Computer Applications, POSET and Hasse Diagram, Di-Graph of the relation.
* Application of Graphs like Königsberg Bridge Problem, Utilities Problem, Electrical Network Problems, Seating Problem.
* Different type of Binary Tree and their applications, BFS and DFS Algorithm, Directed Graphs and Directed Trees.
* Case Study.

## References
### Textbooks 
1.  C.L. Liu, D.P. Mohapatra, "Elements of Discrete Mathematics", McGraw Hill Education (India) Private Limited, 2008.
2.  Seymour Lipscutz, Marc Lars Lipson, "Discrete Mathematics", Tata McGraw Hill Education Private Limited, 2015.
3.  Kenneth A Ross, Charles R.B. Wright, "Discrete Mathematics", 5th Edition, Pearson Education India, 2012.
4. Swapan Kumar Sarkar, "Discrete Mathematics", 9th Edition, S Chand & Co Ltd, 2016.
5.  C. L. Liu, "Elements of Discrete Mathematics", TMH Edition.
6.  J.K. Tremblay and R Manohar, "Discrete Mathematical Structures with applications to Computer Science", McGraw Hill.
7.  Kolman, Busby, Ross, "Discrete mathematical Structures", Pearson.
8.  Harry, F., "Graph theory", Addison Wesley.