---
country: "india"
university: "calicut-university"
branch: "computer-applications"
version: "2024"
semester: 1
course_code: "bca1cj102"
course_title: "mathematical-foundation-for-computer-applications"
language: "english"
contributor: "@SyedFaseeh7"
---

# BCA1CJ102: Mathematical Foundation for Computer Applications

## Course Objectives
* Provide a fundamental exploration of mathematical concepts essential for computer science.
* Cover key topics including Linear Algebra, Differential Calculus, and Integral Calculus.
* Equip students with the mathematical tools and reasoning skills necessary for creating and analyzing algorithms and solving computational problems in various areas of computer science like Data Science and Artificial Intelligence.

## Course Outcomes
* **CO 1:** Reflect the concept of matrices and determinants as a way to depict and streamline mathematical ideas to perform basic operations.
* **CO 2:** Able to find the inverse of square matrices using different methods and demonstrate a solid understanding of eigenvalues.
* **CO 3:** Proficiency in solving linear equations using different techniques and understanding the geometric interpretation of solutions.
* **CO 4:** Gain proficiency in representing vectors geometrically and algebraically, understanding vector addition, dot and cross products.
* **CO 5:** Able to apply differential and integral calculus to various functions encountered in computer applications such as polynomials, exponentials and logarithmic functions.
* **CO 6:** Represent various mathematical problems using algorithmic approaches and enhance problem-solving skills by visualizing solutions through the utilization of software tools.

## Course Content

### Module - 1 (Matrices and Determinants)
* Matrices: Definition, Order of a matrix, Types of matrices.
* Operations on matrices: Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication.
* Properties of matrix: Various kind of Matrices, Transpose of a matrix[cite: 454].
* Elementary Transformations of Matrices and Rank of Matrices.
* Symmetric and Skew Symmetric Matrices.
* Determinants, Minors, Cofactors, Inverse of a matrix.

### Module - 2 (Linear Algebra and Vector Calculus)
* Linear Independence: Characteristic equations.
* Eigenvalues, Eigen Vector.
* Solving system of linear equations: Gauss Elimination Method, Gauss Jordan method, Gauss Siedel Methods.
* Vectors: Definition, Magnitude of a vector, Types of Vectors, Vector addition.
* Dot products and Cross products.
* Vectors in 2- and 3-space.

### Module - 3 (Differentiation)
* Limits : Definition (concept only), Derivative of a Point, Derivative at Function.
* Differentiation: Definition, Differentiation from first principle, Differentiation of important function.
* Product rule, Quotient rule.
* Derivative of function of a function.
* Logarithmic differentiation.

### Module - 4 (Integration)
* Integration: Integral as Anti-derivative, Indefinite integral & constant of integration.
* Fundamental theorems, Elementary Standard results.
* Integral of different functions, Integration by Substitution.
* Definite Integrals, Properties of definite integrals.
* Evaluation of Definite Integrals by Substitution.

### Module - 5 (Open-Ended Module - Application Level)
This module involves discussion on topics from the following areas:
* Differential Equation and concepts of First and Second Order ODE's.
* Application of Logarithm.
* Combinatorics.
* Trigonometric concepts.
* Applications of Matrices in various fields of computer like image processing, cryptography etc.
* Real-world examples for using eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
* Vectors assisting in GPS technology to provide accurate navigation data.
* 3D vectors enhancement in virtual reality experiences.
* Importance of differentiation and integration in fields like Machine Learning, Robotics, Quantum Computing, etc.
* A Case Study.

## References
### Textbooks
1. Erwin Kreyszig, *Advanced Engineering Mathematics*, Wiley.
2. John Bird, *Higher Engineering Mathematics*, Elsevier Direct.
3. S.K.Goyal, *Skills in Mathematics: Algebra*.
4. B S Grewal, *Higher Engineering Mathematics*, Khanna Publishers.
5. Ramana, *Higher Engineering Mathematics*, Tata McGraw Hill.
6. P Kandasamy, *Engineering Mathematics*, S. Chand Group.
7.  Gilbert Strang, *Introduction to Linear Algebra*, Wellesley-Cambridge Press, 2023.
8.  Kenneth Hoffman, Ray Kunze, *Linear Algebra*, Prentice Hall India Learning, 2015.
9.  Gilbert Strang, *Calculus*, Wellesley-Cambridge Press, 2023.
10. Joseph Edwards, *Differential Calculus for Beginners*, Arihant Publications, 2016.
11. Joseph Edwards, *Integral Calculus for Beginners*, Arihant Publications, 2016.