---
country: "india"
university: "calicut-university"
branch: "computer-applications"
version: "2024"
semester: 1
course_code: "bca1cj101"
course_title: "fundamentals-of-computers-and-computational-thinking"
language: "english"
contributor: "@SyedFaseeh7"
---

# BCA1CJ101: Fundamentals of Computers and Computational Thinking

## Course Objectives
* Provide a comprehensive overview of computing, covering historical milestones, hardware components, and software systems, and computational thinking principles.
* Explore the evolution of computing systems, hardware intricacies, and software distinctions.
* Emphasize problem-solving skills and algorithmic thinking.
* Provide hands-on experience with hardware assembly, operating system installation, and algorithm visualization.

## Course Outcomes
* **CO 1:** Develop a foundational knowledge of computing systems, encompassing their historical development, evolutionary milestones, and the notable contributions of key figures in the field.
* **CO 2:** Acquire familiarity with diverse hardware components constituting a computer system.
* **CO 3:** Gain practical expertise by engaging in hands-on activities focused on the installation and configuration of diverse hardware components within a computer system.
* **CO 4:** Explore the spectrum of software types, and actively participate in the partitioning, installation, and configuration of operating systems to cultivate a comprehensive understanding of software systems.
* **CO 5:** Develop a foundational understanding of computer science as a discipline, examining problems through the lens of computational thinking and cultivating analytical skills to address challenges in the field.
* **CO 6:** Represent complex problems using algorithmic approaches and enhance problem-solving skills by visualizing solutions through the utilization of various software tools.

## Course Content

### Module - 1 (History and Evolution of Computing System)
* Evolution of Computers: History and Generations.
* Overview of Computer System: Von Neumann Model, Number Systems (Binary, Hexa, Octal, Decimal).
* Number Conversion and Digital Codes: Conversion from one number system to another, Digital Codes (Gray, Excess-3, BCD).
* Pioneers and Contributors: Charles Babbage, John von Neumann, Alan Turing, John Mauchly, J. Presper Eckert, John McCarthy (Contributions only).
* Computing Systems Past to Present: Single Core, Dual-Core, and Multi-Core Processors, Graphics Processing Unit (GPU),
Accelerated Processing Unit, Quantum Processing Units (QPU) (Concept only).

### Module - 2 (Hardware)
* Active Electronic Components: Diode, Transistor, Integrated Circuits (Definition, Symbol and Function).
* Passive Electronic Components: Resistors, Capacitors, Inductors (Definition, Symbol and Function).
* Motherboard Components: CPU and Cooling Fan, RAM, Expansion Slots (PCIe), Input/Output Ports, Chipset, BIOS/UEFI Chip, SATA/NVMe Slots, Network Interface, Ports- Ethernet, VGA, HDMI, USB (Concept only).
* Computer Components: SMPS, Motherboard, Storage Devices (HDD, SSD, NVMe), RAM (DRAM, SRAM, DDR SDRAM), ROM, Cache (Concept only).

### Module - 3 (Software)
* Software Types: Application Software, System Software,Examples of both the softwares.
* Operating System: Need of OS, Types (Proprietary and Open Source), Hardware-Software Compatibility, POST, Booting.
* OS Installation: Bootable Media, UEFI/Legacy BIOS, Disk Partitioning, Dual Booting, Boot Manager (BOOTMGR, Grub), File Systems (FAT, NTFS, ext4).
* Device Drivers:  Need of Device Drivers, Driver Interactions(Basic concept only).

### Module - 4 (Computer Science and Computational Thinking)
* Role of Computer Science in the Modern Era.
* Problem Solving: Defining the Problem, Systematic Approach.
* Computational Thinking: Problem Decomposition, Pattern Identification, Abstraction, Generalization.
* Logical Thinking: Inductive and Deductive Reasoning, Logical Expressions.
* Algorithmic Thinking: Intuition vs Precision, Defining algorithms, Qualities of a Good Algorithm.
* Flowchart: Symbols and Examples using Raptor.

### Module - 5 (Open Ended Module - Practical Activities)
* **Hardware Labs:**
    * Identify and list specifications of electronic and motherboard components.
    * Identify and Describe various ports and connectors on 
      motherboard.
    * Installation of various components on motherboard (Processor,Fan, Heat Sink, RAM etc.).
    * Hands-on experience in assembling and disassembling a computer system(SMPS, Motherboard, Storage Device etc.).
    * Accessing and configuring BIOS/UEFI settings.
* **OS Installation Labs:**
    * Preparation of bootable media with software like Rufus.
    * Install operating system (both single booting and dual booting- (Windows/Linux)) on a given computer.
* **Algorithm/Flowchart Labs (using RAPTOR tool):**    
    Develop algorithms and implement the solutions using RAPTOR flowchart execution tool for the following problems. 
    * Read and print a number.
    * Calculate the total bill for three items.
    * Read ages of two persons and print the elder one.
    * Calculate electricity bill for various slabs.
    * Check if a year is a leap year.
    * Print the first N numbers using a loop.

## References
### Textbooks
1.  Gary B. Shelly, Thomas J. Cashman, and Misty E. Vermaat, "Introduction to Computers", Cengage Learning, 2008.
2.  Pradeep K. Sinha and Priti Sinha, "Computer Fundamentals: Concepts, Systems & Applications", BPB Publications.
3.  Kevin Wilson, "Computer Hardware: The Illustrated Guide to Understanding Computer Hardware", Amazon Digital Services LLC - KDP, 2018.
4.  John Hanna, "OS Installation 101: A Step-by-Step Approach for Newbies".
5.  David Riley and Kenny Hunt, "Computational thinking for modern solver", Chapman & Hall/CRC, 2014.
6.  R.G. Dromey, "How to solve it by Computer", PHI, 2008.