---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "computer-science"
version: "2024"
semester: 2
course_code: "GAPHT121"
course_title: "physics-for-information-science"
language: "english"
contributor: "@adhithyan-kj"
---

# GAPHT121 - Physics for Information Science

## Course Objectives
1. To equip students with a strong foundation in the fundamentals of Physics, impart this knowledge within the context of Information Science disciplines, cultivate scientific attitudes and critical thinking skills, and enable students to integrate Physics concepts with their core Information Science programs.
2. To make the students gain practical knowledge to correlate the theoretical studies and to develop practical applications of engineering.

---
## Syllabus Modules

### Module 1: Electrical Conductivity and Superconductivity
- Electrical Conductivity: Classical free electron theory, Electrical conductivity in metals.
- Energy Bands: Fermi Dirac distribution, Variation of Fermi function with temperature, Fermi Energy, Energy bands, Classification of materials into conductor, semiconductor and insulator.
- Superconductivity: Transition temperature, Critical field, Meissner effect.
- Theories and Applications: Type 1 and Type II Super conductors, BCS Theory, Applications of superconductors.

### Module 2: Quantum Mechanics
- Introduction: Concept of uncertainty and conjugate observables (qualitative), Uncertainty principle (statement only), Application of uncertainty principle (Absence of electron inside nucleus, Natural line broadening).
- Wave Function: properties, physical interpretation.
- Schrödinger Equation: Formulation of time dependent and time independent Schrodinger equations.
- Particle in a Box: Derivation of energy eigen values and normalized wave function.
- Tunnelling: Quantum Mechanical Tunnelling (Qualitative).

### Module 3: Semiconductor Physics
- Intrinsic Semiconductor: Derivation of density of electrons/holes, Intrinsic carrier concentration, Variation of Intrinsic carrier concentration with temperature.
- Extrinsic Semiconductor (qualitative).
- P-N Junction: Formation of p-n junction.
- Fermi Level: intrinsic and extrinsic semiconductors.
- P-N Junction Characteristics: Energy band diagram, Qualitative description of charge flow, Forward and reverse biased p-n junctions, Diode equation (Derivation), I-V Characteristics of p-n junction.

### Module 4: Semiconductor Devices and Photonic Devices
- Semiconductor Devices: Rectifiers (Full wave and Half wave).
- Diodes: Zener diode (VI characteristics), Tunnel diode (VI characteristics).
- Semiconductor Laser: Construction and working, Applications.
- Photonic Devices (Qualitative): Photo detectors (Junction and PIN photodiodes), Solar cells (IV Characteristics, Efficiency, Stringing of Solar cells to solar panel), Light Emitting Diode, Applications.

---
## Text Books
- **HK Malik and A K Singh**, *Engineering Physics*, McGraw Hill, $2^{nd}$ Edition, 2017.
- **Arthur Beiser**, *Concepts of Modern Physics*, Tata McGraw Hill Publications, $6^{th}$ Edition, 2003.
- **MN Avadhanulu, P G Kshirsagar, TVS Arunmurthy**, *A Textbook of Engineering Physics*, S. Chand, 11th Edition, 2018.

## Reference Books
- **Robert F Pierret**, *Semiconductor Devices Fundamentals*, Pearson Education, 1995.
- **Robert F Pierret**, *Advanced Semiconductor Fundamental*, Pearson Education, 2nd Edition, 2002.
- **Ben G Streetman and Sanjay Kumar Banerjee**, *Solid State Electronic Devices*, Pearson Education, $6/e$, 2010.
- **S.O. Pillai**, *Solid State Physics*, New age international publishers, Revised Edition, 2016.
- **Charles Kittel**, *Introduction to Solid State Physics*, Wiley India Edition, $10^{th}$ Edition, 2022.
- **Premlet B**, *Advanced Engineering Physics*, Phasor Books, 2017.
- **I. Dominic and. A. Nahari**, *A Text Book of Engineering Physics*, Owl Books Publishers, Revised Edition, 2016.

## Video Links
- `https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115103108` (Module 1)
- `https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115101107` (Module 1)
- `https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115102023` (Module 2)
- `https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108106181` (Module 3)
- `https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108108112` (Module 4)

---