---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "computer-science"
version: "2024"
semester: 2
course_code: "GAMAT201"
course_title: "mathematics-for-information-science-2"
language: "english"
contributor: "@adhithyan-kj"
---

# GAMAT201 - Mathematics for Information Science - 2

## Course Objectives
1. To provide a comprehensive understanding of linear algebra focusing on fundamental concepts and applications, and to develop necessary skills to effectively utilize linear algebra in advanced studies and professional practice.

---
## Syllabus Modules

### Module 1: Systems of Linear Equations and Eigen-Theory
- Linear systems of equations, Solution by Gauss elimination.
- Matrix Properties: Row echelon form and rank of a matrix.
- Fundamental theorem for linear systems - homogeneous and non-homogeneous (without proof).
- Eigen-Theory: Eigen values and Eigen vectors of matrices, Diagonalization of matrices.

### Module 2: Vector Spaces and Subspaces
- Vector Spaces, Examples of vector space - $R^n$ and $M_{m \times n}$ only.
- Subspaces, Examples as subspaces of $R^{n}$ and $M_{m \times n}$.
- Linear combinations of vectors in a vector space, Spanning sets, Linear dependence and independence.
- Basis for a vector space, The dimension of vector space.
- Coordinates and Change of Basis in $R^{n}$: Transition Matrix (without proof).

### Module 3: Inner Product Spaces and Orthogonalization
- Vector Metrics: Vector length and unit vector, Dot product, angle between two vectors, The Cauchy-Schwarz Inequality.
- Inner Products: Examples as $R^{n}$ and $M_{2\times2}$, Properties of inner products, Definitions of length, distance and angle.
- Orthogonality: Orthogonal projections in inner product spaces, Orthogonal and orthonormal sets/basis.
- Gram-Schmidt orthonormalization process (without proof).
- Least Squares: The least squares problem, Projection onto a Subspace, Solving the least square problems.

### Module 4: Linear Transformations
- Linear Transformations: Properties of linear transformations.
- Matrix Representation: Linear Transformation given by a matrix.
- Examples: Rotation in $R^{2}$, Projection in $R^{3}$.
- Kernel and Range: Kernel of a Linear Transformation and its basis, Range of a Linear Transformation and its basis.
- Rank and Nullity: Rank and Nullity of a Linear Transformation, Sum of Rank and Nullity (without proof).
- Matrices for Linear Transformations.

---
## Text Books
- **Erwin Kreyszig**, *Advanced Engineering Mathematics*, John Wiley & Sons, $10^{th}$ edition, 2016.
- **Ron Larson**, *Elementary Linear Algebra*, Cengage Learning, 8th edition, 2017.

## Reference Books
- **Marc Peter Deisenroth, A. Aldo Faisal & Cheng SoonOng**, *Mathematics for Machine Learning*, Cambridge University Press, 1st edition, 2020.
- **Gilbert Strang**, *Linear algebra and learning from data*, Wellesley-Cambridge Press, 1st edition, 2019.
- **Stephen Andrilli & David Hecker**, *Elementary Linear Algebra*, Academic Press Inc., 4th edition, 2010.
- **Howard Anton, Chris Rorres**, *Elementary Linear Algebra*, Wiley, $11^{th}$ edition, 2019.

## Video Links
- `https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/111/107/111107164/` (Covers Modules 1, 2, 3, 4)

---