---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "computer-science"
version: "2024"
semester: 2
course_code: "GXEST203"
course_title: "foundations-of-computing-from-hardware-essentials-to-web-design"
language: "english"
contributor: "@adhithyan-kj"
---

# GXEST203 - Foundations of Computing: From Hardware Essentials to Web Design

## Course Objectives
1. To introduce the students to the fundamental building blocks of an IT infrastructure including the computing systems, its peripherals, Operating Systems and Networking.
2. To make the learners capable of developing and deploying simple and dynamic websites.

---
## Syllabus Modules

### Module 1: Computer Hardware and Peripherals
- Computer Hardware: CPU, Memory, Memory hierarchy (registers, cache, RAM, virtual memory), Motherboard.
- Computer Peripherals: I/O devices, Storage devices (HDDs, SSDs, optical drives).
- System Basics: I/O communication and device management, Interface cards, Buses, Firmware, Boot process.

### Module 2: Data Representation and CPU Architecture
- Data Representation: Binary representation of data and numbers, Integer Representation.
- Storage Units: bits, bytes, kilobytes, etc., ASCII and Unicode.
- CPU Architecture and Instruction Set: Basic CPU architecture (ALU, registers, control unit), Instruction format and assembly language (basics only).
- Execution Cycle: Fetch-execute cycle and instruction execution.

### Module 3: System Software and Computer Communications
- Computer System Software: Operating Systems, Basic commands in Linux / Windows.
- Shell scripting (bash).
- Networking: LAN, MAN, WAN, Client/Server networks, Peer-to-Peer networks, Topologies.
- Network Protocols and Security: Basics of IP addresses, DHCP, NAT, Network Security (Desktop & Perimeter), DNS, VPN, Routers, Client-Server, Internet, WWW, Web servers.

### Module 4: Web Design Fundamentals
- Web Design (Basics of HTML, CSS, and JavaScript).
- Understanding the web content delivery, Understanding HTML and XHTML Connections.
- Understanding Cascading Style Sheets.
- Understanding JavaScript.

---
## Text Books
- **G.Michael Schneider, Judith Gersting**, *Invitation to Computer Science*, Cengage, $2/e$, 2020.
- **Irv Englander**, *The Architecture of Computer Hardware, Systems Software, & Networking: An Information Technology Approach*, Wiley, $5/e$, 2014.
- **Julie C. Meloni Jennifer Kyrnin**, *HTML, CSS, and JavaScript All in One, Sams Teach Yourself*, Pearson, $1/e$, 2020.

## Reference Books
- **Noam Nisan and Shimon Schocken**, *The Elements of Computing Systems, second edition: Building a Modern Computer from First Principles*, The MIT Press, 2/e, 2021.
- **Peter Notron**, *Peter Norton's Introduction to Computers*, McGrawHill, 6/e, 2010.
- **Jon Duckett**, *Web Design with HTML, CSS, JavaScript and Jquery*, Wiley, $1/e$, 2014.

## Video Links
- `https://www.nand2tetris.org/` (Module 1)
- `https://onlinecourses.swayam2.ac.in/nou20_cs05/preview` (Module 2)

---