---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "computer-science"
version: "2024"
semester: 2
course_code: "pcitt205"
course_title: "discrete-mathematical-structures"
language: "english"
contributor: "@adhithyan-kj"
---

# PCITT205 - Discrete Mathematical Structures

## Course Objectives
1. Students will be able to understand and apply mathematical notations and concepts essential for computing.
2. Students can develop and utilize mathematical reasoning and proof strategies to enhance their analytical thinking and creative problem-solving skills.

---
## Syllabus Modules

### Module 1: Introduction to Logic
- Propositional Logic, Truth tables, Conditional propositions and Logical Equivalence, The laws of Logic, The Principle of Duality.
- Resolution proofs.
- Predicates and Quantifiers: Universal quantifier and Existential quantifier, Negation of Quantifiers.
- Rules of Inference: The Rule of Universal Specification, The Rule of Universal Generalizations, The implications of Quantifiers.

### Module 2: Counting Principles and Combinatorics
- Fundamental Principles of Counting: The Rules of Sum and Product, Permutations, Combinations.
- The Binomial Theorem (without proof), Combinations with Repetition.
- Pigeon Hole Principle.
- Principle of Inclusion and Exclusion (without proof), Derangements.

### Module 3: Relations, Functions, and Algebraic Structures
- Sets, Relations, Functions, Equivalence Relations.
- Posets and Lattices, Hasse Diagrams, Complimented and Distributive lattices.
- Algebraic Structures: Structured sets for binary operations, Semigroups, Monoids, Groups, Rings, Fields.

### Module 4: Generating Functions and Recurrence Relations
- Generating Function: Definitions and Examples, Calculation Techniques, Exponential Generating Function.
- Recurrence Relations: First-order linear recurrence relations with constant coefficients (homogeneous, non-homogeneous Solution).
- Second-order linear recurrence relations with constant coefficients (homogeneous, non-homogeneous Solution).

---
## Text Books
- **Ralph P. Grimaldi, B. V. Ramana**, *Discrete and Combinatorial Mathematics: An Applied Introduction*, Pearson, $5^{th}$ Edition, 2007.
- **T Veerarajan**, *Discrete Mathematics with Graph Theory and Combinatorics*, Tata McGraw Hill, $1^{st}$ Edition, 2007.

## Reference Books
- **K. H. Rosen**, *Discrete Mathematics and its Applications*, McGraw Hill, $7^{th}$ Edition, 2012.
- **D. S. Chandrasekharaiah**, *Discrete Mathematical Structures*, PRISM Books, $4^{th}$ Edition, 2012.
- **J. P. Tremblay and R. Manohar**, *Discrete Mathematical Structures with Application to Computer Science*, Tata McGraw Hill, $2^{nd}$ Edition, 2002.
- **Joe L. Mott, Abraham Kandel and Theodore P. Baker**, *Discrete Mathematics for Computer Scientists & Mathematicians*, Pearson Education, 2nd Edition, 2015.

## Video Links
- `https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106094` (Modules 1 and 3)
- `https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106103205` (Modules 2 and 4)

---