---
country: "india"
university: "cusat"
branch: "msc-environmental-science-and-technology"
semester: "1"
course_code: "24-360-0101"
course_title: "environmental-biology"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
version: "2024"
---

# 24-360-0101: 
  - (ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY

## Course Objectives

1. Understand Foundations of Ecology
2. Explore Population Dynamics
3. Examine Community Dynamics
4. Investigate Ecosystem Functioning
5. Apply Ecology to Conservation

## Course Outcomes
* **CO 1:** Understand the historical development and fundamental concepts of ecology.
* **CO 2:** To Analyze population characteristics and dynamics, to assess the roles of species in community ecology and population balance.
* **CO 3:** To Evaluate the processes of succession, To understand their structure, stability, and resilience.
* **CO 4:** To Examine energy flows, nutrient cycling, and landscape connectivity, to assess ecosystem functioning and health.
* **CO 5:** Apply principles of conservation biology to analyze threats to biodiversity, evaluate ecosystem services, and implement restoration.

## Course Content
### Module 1: 
* Definition
* Historic development in ecological sciences
* Level of ecological organization
* Speciation
* Ecological niche
* Geographic Ecology:
  Distribution of organisms
* Factors influencing geographic patterns and importance of Biogeography
* Biological invasions

# ## Module 2:
  ((Population Dynamics)
* Characteristics of population
* Concept of carrying capacity
* Population growth and regulations:
  Population fluctuations
  Dispersion and metapopulation
  Concept of r & k species
  Key stone species community ecology
  Abundance in time and space
  Factors influencing growth and decline
  Population regulation and balance of nature

# ## Module 3:
  ((Community Dynamics)
* Community Dynamics:
  Succession and biodiversity
  Food Webs and trophic interactions
  Disturbance ecology and resilience
* Species Interaction:
  Negative interactions (competition, predation, parasitism)
  Positive interactions (mutualism, commensalism)
  Implications for community structure and stability

# ## Module 4:
  ((Ecosystem Functioning)
* Ecosystem Ecology:
  Energy flows and production
  Nutrient cycling and biogeochemical processes
  Landscape ecology and connectivity
* Harvesting populations and Pest control:
  Sustainable harvesting practices
  Pest control strategies and ecological impacts
  Balancing human needs with ecosystem health

# ## Module 5:
  ((Applied Ecology and Conservation)
* Principles of conservation biology
* Threats to biodiversity
* Ecosystem services
* Ecosystem Health and Human Impact
* Human Impacts on ecosystem and conservation biology
* Restoration ecology
* Real world examples of ecological principles in action
* Case studies in ecosystem management and restoration
* Integrating ecological knowledge into decision making processes

## References

1. Molles, Manuel C., and Teresa Tibbets. Ecology: concepts and applications. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2002.
2. Begon, Michael, Martin Mortimer, and David J. Thompson. Population ecology: a unified study of animals and plants. John Wiley & Sons, 2009.
3. Verhoef, Herman A., and Peter J. Morin, eds. Community ecology: processes, models, and applications. Oxford University Press, 2010.
4. Raffaelli, David G., and Christopher LJ Frid, eds. Ecosystem ecology: a new synthesis. Cambridge University Press, 2010.
5. Van Dyke, Fred. Conservation biology: foundations, concepts, applications. Springer Science & Business Media, 2008.
