---
country: "india"
university: "cusat"
branch: "msc-environmental-science-and-technology"
semester: "1"
course_code: "24-360-0104"
course_title: "programming-&-statistics"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
version: "2024"
---

# 24-360-0104: 
  - (PROGRAMMING & STATISTICS

## Course Objectives

* The main objective of this course is to provide students a basic understanding the principles of computers and computer programming. They should readily use the object-oriented programming and apply various data types and control sequences. Students should be capable of doing statistical analysis and data analysis on environmental data sets.

## Course Outcomes
* **CO 1:** Discuss the basics of programming and interfacing in computer programming.
* **CO 2:** Interpret the various data types and operations in programming.
* **CO 3:** Execute codes using modules and functions in object-oriented programming.
* **CO 4:** Operate the fundamental statistical analysis on environmental data sets.
* **CO 5:** Examine basic data analysis and visualisation of environmental data.


## Course Content
### Module 1: 
* Basic principles of computers
* Relations between computers and programs
* Compilers and Interpreters
* History of Programming languages
* Concepts of programming
* Steps involved in developing a program
* Object-oriented programming;
* Introduction to Python Programming:
  Installing Python
  Different methods of using Python
* Inputs and outputs

# ## Module 2:
  ((Data types and control structures)
* Operators
* Data types
* Variables
* Expressions
* Statements
* Assignment statements
* Strings and string operations
* Control structures:
  Conditional and decision making- loops

# ## Module 3:
  ((Modules and Functions)
* Standard Modules
* Libraries:
  Pandas
  NumPy
  SciPy
* Packages
* Create a module
* Function parameters
* Variable arguments
* Scope of Function-Documentation
* Create a Function

# ## Module 4:
  ((Data Handling and Visualization)
* File handling
* Reading from file
* Writing to file
* Data structures:
  Array
  List
  Dictionary
* Error processing
* Exceptions
* Visualistion with Matplotlib

# ## Module 5:
  ((Statistical Analysis)
* Python statistic libraries
* Descriptive Statistics:
  Central tendency
  Varibility
  Correlation
* Visualisation:
  Axes
  DataFrames
  Histograms
  Pie Charts
  Box Plots
  Bar Charts
  XY Plots

## References

1. Martin C. Brown, “Python: The Complete Reference”, 2018, Mc Graw Hill.
2. Allen Downey, “Think Python: How to Think Like a Computer Scientist”, 2016, Green Tea Press, Needham, Massachusetts.
3. Charles R Severance, “Python for Everybody Exploring Data Using Pythons 3”, 2017, Python Learn.
4. Allen B. Downey, “Think Stats: Exploratory Data Analysis in Python”, 2014, Green Tea Press, Needham, Massachusetts.
5. For installation and basic codes: www.python.org
6. For Python Tutorials : https://www.w3schools.com/python/
