---
country: "india"
university: "cusat"
branch: "msc-environmental-science-and-technology"
semester: "1"
course_code: "24-360-0105"
course_title: "environmental-microbiology"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
version: "2024"
---

# 24-360-0105: 
  - (ENVIRONMENTAL MICROBIOLOGY

## Course Objectives

* Course aims to introduce basic biology students to the world of microbes. Students will familiarize with different types of microbes present in the environment, to isolate those microbes, identify and characterize them. Course will cover the structure, reproduction, clinical manifestations, epidemiology and preventive measures of different pathogens present in the environment.

## Course Outcomes
* **CO 1:** Explain the basics of microbiological techniques, isolation techniques and microscopy.
* **CO 2:** Discuss the concept and goal of molecular microbiology, gene structure and regulation in bacteria.
* **CO 3:** Describe the structure, function, nutrition and its uptake in bacteria, fungi, protozoa and algae.
* **CO 4:** Discuss the structure, properties and cultivation of pathogenic viruses.
* **CO 5:** Describe the microbial interactions, nutrient cycling, factors affecting their growth and microbial ecology.


## Course Content
### Module 1: 
* History and scope of microbiology
* Different kinds of media for isolation and study of microorganisms
* Microbiological water and sediment samplers
* Microscope and microscopy
* Concept of pure cultures and methods of obtaining pure cultures
* Control of microorganisms by physical and chemical agents:
  Definitions
  The pattern of microbial death
* Conditions influencing the effectiveness of antimicrobial agents

# ## Module 2:
  ((Fundamentals in Molecular Biology)
* Concepts and criteria of molecular microbiology
* Detection and isolation of mutants
* Gene structure
* Regulation of gene activity in prokaryotes:
  Transcription
  Translation
* Polypeptide synthesis
* Feed back inhibition:
  E coli lactose system and operon model
* Attenuation
* Global regulatory systems:
  Catabolic repression
* PCR variations:
  Nested PCR
  Inverse PCR
  Reverse -transcriptase PCR
  Real time PCR
* DNA sequencing:
  Sanger‘s chain termination method
  Automated DNA sequencer
  BLAST search algorithm
  Construction of phylogenetic tree and Next generation sequencers
  Whole genome shot gun sequencing
  Metagenomics

# ## Module 3:
  ((Bacteria, Fungi, Protozoans and Microalgae)
* Bacteria:
  Cell structure
    + Size
    + Shape
    + Arrangements
  Cell organization
    + Cell membranes
    + Cytoplasmic matrix
    + Nucleoid
    + Cell wall
    + Components external to the cell wall - capsule, slime layers and S - layers, pilli and fimbriae, flagella
  Motility and chemotaxix
  Bacterial endospores Bacterial nutrition
  Common nutrient requirements
    + Requirement for carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorous and sulphur
    + Nutritional types,
    + Requirements for growth factors
  Nutrient up take
    + Passive diffusion and active transport
    + Group translocation and ion uptake
  Bacterial growth
    + Growth curve
    + Mathematics of growth
    + Measurement of microbial growth
    + Continuous culture of microorganisms
* Fungi:
  Basic concepts
  Distribution
  Importance
  Structure
  Nutrition and metabolism
  Reproduction
  Characteristics of fungal division and classification
* Protozoans:
  Basic concepts
  Distribution
  Importance
  Morphology
  Nutrition
  Encystment and excystment
  Locomotor yorganells
  Reproduction and classification
* Microalgae:
  Basic concepts
  Distribution
  Structure
  Algal nutrition
  Algal reproduction
  Characteristics
  Classification

# ## Module 4:
  ((Viruses)
* Early development in virology
* General properties of viruses
* Cultivation of viruses
* Virus preparation
* Purification and assays
* Structure of viruses;
* Bacteriophages:
  Classification
  Replication
* Viroids and prions
* Viruses of fungi, algae and protozoans
* Virus vaccines and interferons

# ## Module 5:
  ((Microorganisms Interaction and Microbial Ecology)
* Foundations of microbial ecology and microbial interactions:
  Mutualism
  Cooperation
  Commensalisms
  Predation
  Parasitism
  Amensalism
  Competition, symbiosis in complex systems
* Influence of environmental factors on growth:
  Solute and water activity
  pH
  Temperature
  Oxygen concentration
  Pressure
  Radiation
* Microbial growth in natural environment:
  Growth limitation by environmental factors
  Counting viable but non-cultivable cells
  Quorum sensing and microbial populations
* Nutrient cycling interactions:
  Carbon cycle
  Sulphur cycle
  Nitrogen cycle
  Manganese cycle
  Microorganisms and metal toxicity
* The physical environment:
  Microenvironment and niche
  Biofilm and microbial mats
  Microorganisms and ecosystems
  Microorganism movement between ecosystems

## References

1. Clark, D.P.;(2010). Molecular Biology .Elsevier Inc. Amsterdam.
2. Daniel, D. C. ;(2012). Environmental Science. 9th Edition Jones & Bartlett Learning.
3. Flint, S.J.; Enquist,L.W.; Racaniello, V.R.; Skalka,A.M.;(2009). Principles of Virology. (3rd Edition) ASM Press, Washington , DC.
4. Fulekar, M.H.;(2010). Environmental Microbiology. Science Publishers CRC Press Taylor & Francis Group.
5. Gerald, K.;(2010). Cell Biology. 6th Edition International Student Version John Wiley & Sons, Limited, Willey-Blackwell, USA.
6. Jeffrey, C.; Pommerville.; (2004). Alcamos Fundamentals of Microbiology. 7th Edition Jones & Bartlett Publishers.
7. Prescott, L.M.; HareleyJ.P.;Klein,D.A.; (2005). Microbiology. (6thEdition). McGraw Hill Publishing Co.Ltd.
8. Raina M.M.; IanL.P.; Charles,P.G.; (2006). Environmental Microbiology Elsevier, Academic Press, San Diego, CA, USA.
