---
country: "india"
university: "university-of-hyderabad"
branch: "computer-science"
scheme: "2022"
semester: 1
course_code: "cs425"
course_title: "cryptography"
language: "english"
contributor: "@abhijith314"
---

# CS425: Cryptography

## Prerequisite Course / Knowledge
* [cite_start]None [cite: 1053]

## Course Objectives
* [cite_start]CO1: Describe various mathematical techniques used in cryptology (Understand)[cite: 1058].
* CO2: Illustrate the design techniques of various cryptographic algorithms through the analysis of classic ciphers. (Apply) [cite_start][cite: 1059].
* [cite_start]CO3: Apply different mathematical techniques in various symmetric and asymmetric cryptographic algorithms (Apply)[cite: 1060].
* CO4: Evaluate the need for digital signatures and their importance in modern electronic era. (Evaluate) [cite_start][cite: 1061].
* CO5: Examine how a mathematical hard problem can be used to construct into a public key cryptosystem. (Analyze) [cite_start][cite: 1062].

## Course Content

### Module 1: Overview, History and Classical Ciphers
* Cryptography, steganography and cryptanalysis; History and development; [cite_start]Classical cryptosystems: shift, substitution and Vigenere ciphers[cite: 1071].
* Attacks on classical ciphers; [cite_start]Enigma cryptosystem and Role of WW-II[cite: 1072].
* [cite_start]Designing a provably secure system, One-Time pads[cite: 1073].

### Module 2: Symmetric Key Cryptosystems and GSM Security
* Basics of number theory and algebra; Introduction to information theory, Shannon's axioms; [cite_start]DES and AES[cite: 1075].
* [cite_start]Encryption in GSM communications, A5 family of algorithms[cite: 1076].

### Module 3: Asymmetric Key Cryptosystems and Digital Signatures
* Prime numbers, factorization and discrete algorithms; RSA and El Gamal cryptosystems; [cite_start]Signature schemes, hash functions and secret sharing schemes[cite: 1078].

### Module 4: Introduction to Cryptanalysis
* [cite_start]Known plaintext, known cipher text, chosen plaintext and chosen cipher text attacks, man-in-the-middle attacks[cite: 1080].
* Attacks on DES and AES, differential cryptanalysis; Attacks on RSA; Attacks on El Gamal; [cite_start]Attacks on A5 family[cite: 1081].

### Module 5: Advanced Topics
* Zero knowledge proofs; Pseudo-random number generators; [cite_start]Industry standards and practices[cite: 1083].

## References
1.  Douglas Stinson. [cite_start]*Cryptography: Theory and Practice*, Third Edition or higher, Chapman & Hall/CRC (Indian Edition) 2011[cite: 1085].
2.  Alfred Menezes, Paul C. van Oorschot and Scott A. Vanstone. [cite_start]*Handbook of Applied Cryptography*, CRC Press (2001)[cite: 1086]. [cite_start](Free PDF available [cite: 1087])
### Additional Reading
3.  Johannes Buchmann. [cite_start]*Introduction to Cryptography*, Springer Pubs., 2nd Edition (2004)[cite: 1089].
4.  Lawrence C. Washington. [cite_start]*Elliptic Curves, Number Theory and Cryptography*, Chapman & Hall/CRC 2nd Edition (2008)[cite: 1090].
5.  Simon Singh. *The Code Book*, 4th Estate Pubs. (2002) [cite_start][cite: 1091].