---
country: "india"
university: "university-of-hyderabad"
branch: "computer-science"
scheme: "2022"
semester: 1
course_code: "cs427"
course_title: "advanced-computer-architecture"
language: "english"
contributor: "@abhijith314"
---

# CS427: Advanced Computer Architecture

## Prerequisite Course / Knowledge
* [cite_start]Computer organizations, Basics of Computer Architecture, Operating Systems [cite: 1139-1140].

## Course Objectives
* CO1: Indicate how to estimate cycles taken for instructions with and without branch prediction, branch target buffer, etc. optimizations. (Understand) [cite_start][cite: 1143].
* CO2: Compare the performance of the system with various optimizations such as dynamic scheduling and speculation versus regular pipelining. (Analyze) [cite_start][cite: 1144-1145].
* CO3: Summarise the problems involving the centralized and distributed shared-memory architectures and operations involved in accessing different memory locations present in multiple processors. (Create) [cite_start][cite: 1146-1147].

## Course Content

### Module 1: Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
* [cite_start]Classes of computers, Trends in technology, Measuring and Reporting Performance, Power consumption and efficiency as the metric, Dependability, Quantitative Principles of Computer Design[cite: 1152].

### Module 2: Instruction Set Principles
* [cite_start]Classifying Instruction Set Architectures, Memory Addressing, Addressing modes, Operations in the instruction set, Instructions for control flow, encoding an instruction set, Role of compilers[cite: 1153].

### Module 3: Memory Hierarchy Design
* Cache performance review, Basic memory hierarchy questions, Basic and advanced optimizations of cache performance.
* Protection: virtual memory and virtual machines.
* [cite_start]Memory technology and optimizations: SRAM, DRAM, Flash memory, Graphics Data RAMs[cite: 1154].

### Module 4: Instruction-Level Parallelism and its Dynamic Exploitation
* Instruction level parallelism: concepts and challenges, basics of pipelining, data hazards, structural hazards, control hazards.
* Minimizing data hazards through forwarding, overcoming branch penalties (delayed branches, static/dynamic prediction).
* [cite_start]Dealing with exceptions in pipelining, dynamic scheduling, Tomasulo's algorithm, speculative processors, high performance instruction delivery, VLIW approach, static and dynamic superscalar processors[cite: 1155].

### Module 5: Multiprocessors and Thread-Level Parallelism
* Multithreading: exploiting thread-level parallelism within a processor.
* Symmetric shared-memory architectures and their performance.
* Distributed shared-memory architectures and their performance.
* [cite_start]Synchronization, models of memory consistency[cite: 1156].

## References
1.  John L. Hennessey and David A. Patterson. [cite_start]*Computer Architecture: A Quantitative Approach*, 5E, Morgan-Kaufmann, 2012[cite: 1158].