---
country: "india"
university: "jamia-millia-islamia
branch: "electrical-and-computer-science-engineering"
scheme: "2020"
semester: 1
course_code: "ast-101
course_title: "communication-skills"
language: "english"
contributor: "@ziyaudheenms"
---


# AST101: Communication Skills

## Course Objectives
* Introduce communication theories, core skills (Reading, Writing, Listening, Speaking), and methods for overcoming communication barriers.
* Impart knowledge of fundamental English grammar rules and expand vocabulary (tenses, agreement, prepositions, synonyms, etc.).
*   Develop proficiency in various writing formats, including formal correspondence, technical reports, resumes, essays, and articles.
*  Familiarize students with speech production mechanics, the classification of English sounds (Phonetics), and the use of IPA symbols for transcription and word stress.
* Engage students with English literature (poetry, essays, drama) to enhance comprehension and interpretative skills.

## Course Outcomes
* **CO 1:**  To gain proficiency in English.
* **CO 2:**  For developing personality,communication fluency & accuracy.
* **CO 3:** For inculcating ideaton and exposition skills.
* **CO 4:** For honing the interpretative, logical, creative and imaginative skills.
* **CO 5:** For creating human sensibilities and forge convergences of technology with larger humanity.

## Course Content

### Module - 1 (Communication skills and it's various aspects)
* Communication Skills: theoretical perspectives.
* Reading, Writing, Listening, Speaking and Pragmatics.
* Identification of Communication Barriers and ways to overcome them.
* Technology, Humanities & communication


### Module - 2 (Grammer)
* Subject-verb agreement, Use of tense & sequence of tenses.
* Use of verbs, repositions & articles, Use
of idioms & phrases, Discourse markers.
* Word vocabulary- synonym, antonym, homonym & one word substitution 


### Module - 3 (Writing)
* Formal & informal letters & Email correspondences.
* Report, Resume, Reviews (Book & Scientific) & Expansion.
* Essay & Article writing.

### Module - 4 (English Phonetics)
* Speech Mechanism, Organs of Speech, Vowels & Consonants.
* Place of Articulations, Manner of Articulation.
* Vowel diagram, IPA symbols.
* Phonetic Transcription, Word , tress.

### Module - 5 (Literature)
* Road Not Taken (Poem by Robert Frost).
* The Express (Poem by Stephan Spender).
* Of Studies (Essay by Francis Bacon).
* Pygmalion (by George Barnard Shaw).


## References
1. John Seely, *The Oxford Guide to effective Writing and Speaking Skills*, Oxford University Press.  
2. Daniel Jones, *English Pronouncing Dictionary*,  Cambridge University Press.  
3. Meenakshi Raman and Sangeeta Sharma, *Technical communication Principles and Practice*, Oxford.  
