---
country: "india"
university: "jamia-millia-islamia
branch: "electrical-and-computer-science-engineering"
scheme: "2020"
semester: 1
course_code: "asb-101
course_title: "engineering-physics-1"
language: "english"
contributor: "@ziyaudheenms"
---


# ASB101: Engineering Physics 1

## Course Objectives
*  Explain the principles of Newtonian Mechanics, including translational and rotational motion, Moment of Inertia, and the dynamics of Simple and Damped Harmonic Oscillators.
* Apply vector calculus and coordinate systems to solve electrostatic problems using Gauss's Law and related theorems (Divergence/Stokes' Theorem).
*  Use Biot-Savart Law and Ampere's Circuital Law to calculate magnetic fields, and introduce the concept of Displacement Current.
*  Describe the necessity of Quantum Theory, explain wave-particle duality (Photoelectric, Compton, de-Broglie effects), and apply the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle.
* Introduce the basics of semiconductors and doping. Explain the Classical Free Electron Theory and the fundamental concepts of Fermi-Dirac and Bose-Einstein statistics.

## Course Outcomes
* **CO 1:**  Introducing the basic theories of Mechanics and Kinematics.
* **CO 2:**  Describing the concepts of coordinate systems and their transformation. Understanding the concept and applications of electric field intensity.
* **CO 3:** Describing the basic laws of magnetism, analysis and their practical applications.
* **CO 4:**Discussing the transition from classical to quantum mechanics, explaining quantum mechanics & related applications.
* **CO 5:** Recalling the basics of semiconductors, explaining various electrical parameters of semiconductors and different laws of distribution of particles. Introducing the concept of free electron theory, its success and failure.

## Course Content

### Module - 1 (Classical Mechanics)
* Review of Newtonian Mechanics in rectilinear Coordinate system, Rigid body, Translational and Rotational motion.
*  Moment of Inertia, Radius of Gyration, Kinematics of rotational motion about fixed axis(Parallel axis theorem Perpendicular axis theorem).
*  Simple harmonic motion (SHM), phaser representation of SHM, Simple Pendulum and Compound Pendulum.
* Damped harmonic oscillator- heavy, critical and light damping, energy decay in damped harmonic oscillator, quality factor. 


### Module - 2 (Electrostatics)
*  Cartesian, Cylindrical and Spherical, Transformation of coordinate systems.
*  Gradient of a scalar divergence and curl of a vector; line integral, surface integral and volume integral.
*  Gauss Divergence Theorem and its applications, Stokes Theorem and its applications, Charge distribution along line, across surface and over volume, Gauss’s law and its applications,
*  Electric field due to uniformly charged infinitely long wire, Electric field due to thin infinite plane sheet, Electric field due to infinite parallel sheets, Electric field due to uniformly distributed charged
spherical shell, Electric field due to non-conducting charged solid sphere.
*   Working and principle of Potentiometer, Wheatstone bridge. 


### Module - 3 (Magnetostatics)
* Biot-Savart law and its application, Magnetic field due to current carrying conductor, Magnetic field at the centre and at the axis of circular coil carrying current.
* Magnetic flux, Gauss’s law in magnetostatics, Ampere’s circuital law and its application, Magnetic induction due to long linear conductor, Magnetic field due to long circular cylinder.
* Equation of Continuity, Concept of Displacement current, Modified Ampere circuital law.

### Module - 4 (Quantum Ideas)
* Prerequisite of Quantum theory, Concept of Black body radiation, Wein`s displacement law, Rayleigh Jeans Planck’s hypothesis, wave particle duality.
* Photoelectric effect; de-Broglie hypothesis; Experimental evidence of matter waves (Davisson-Germer experiment).
* Compton effect, Uncertainty principle and its applications.

### Module - 5 (Solid State Physics)
* Basic of semiconductors, Concept of doping in semiconductors, Intrinsic and Extrinsic semiconductors, p-type and n-type semiconductors.
* Effective mass and law of mass action, Carrier concentration, Electrical conductivity and mobility of charge carriers in intrinsic and extrinsic semiconductors.
* Classical free electron theory of metals and its failure, Explanation of electrical conductivity, thermal conductivity of metals, Weidmann Franz Law, Bose Einstein and Fermi Dirac statistical distribution function.
* Fermi energy of free electron in metal, concept of average energy and total energy of free electrons, relation between average energy and Fermi energy.


## References
1. Mathew N. O. Sadiku, *Elements of Electrodynamics*.  
2. W. Saslow, *Electricity, magnetism and Light*.  
3. Jenkins and White , *Fundamentals of Optics*.  
