---
country: "india"
university: "jamia-millia-islamia
branch: "electrical-and-computer-science-engineering"
scheme: "2020"
semester: 1
course_code: "asb-102"
course_title: "engineering-chemistry"
language: "english"
contributor: "@ziyaudheenms"
---


# ASB102: Engineering Chemistry

## Course Objectives
* Focus on the foundational concepts of material science and the chemistry and behavior of surface-active agents (surfactants).
* Study the fundamental principles and operational techniques of modern instrumental methods for chemical analysis.
* Cover classic chemical analysis methods and the physical chemistry principles governing phase equilibrium using the Phase Rule.
* Develop an understanding of the fundamental concepts, principles, and applications of electrochemistry.
* Introduce the basic chemistry, synthesis, classification, and properties of polymeric materials.

## Course Outcomes
* **CO 1:** To understand basics of material science and surfactants.
* **CO 2:** To understand the fundamentals of instrumental methods of analysis.
* **CO 3:** To study and understand about chemical methods of analysis and phase rule.
* **CO 4:** To develop an understanding of basics of electrochemistry. 
* **CO 5:** To understand about the fundamentals of polymers.

## Course Content

### Module - 1 (Basics Of Material Science And Surfactants)
* Types of crystal system, Bravais lattices, Miller indices, Atomic packing factor,Planar atomic density,Crystal defects.
*  Surface active agents: Soaps, Types and advantages. Detergents, Critical Micellar Concentration, Hydrophilic and Hydrophobic interactions, HLB values. 

### Module - 2 (Instrumental Methods Of Analysis)
*  Chromatography: Definition and its types, Adsorption chromatography, Partition chromatography, High Pressure Liquid Chromatography
*  Fundamentals of Spectroscopy: Principles and Applications of UV-Visible, Infra-Red and Atomic Absorption Spectrometry.

### Module - 3 (Chemical Methods Of Analysis And Phase Rule)
* Gravimetric Analysis: Digestion and its Importance, Favorable Conditions for Precipitation.
* Volumetric Methods of Analysis: Expression of concentration of solutions, Redox, Precipitation and Complexometric Titrations.
* Phase Rule and its applications to One and Multiple Component systems. 

### Module - 4 (Electrochemistry)
* Reversible and Irreversible cell: Electrolytic and Galvanic cell, Electrode Potential, Standard Electrode 
Potential, EMF series, Nernst Equation, Cell emf Measurement.
* Thermodynamic Overview of Electrochemical Processes.
* Conductance, Cell Constant and its determination. 

### Module - 5 (Polymers)
* Fundamentals of polymer chemistry: Molecular weight, Glass transition temperature and Melting point.
* Methods of polymerization, Structure-property relationship, Thermoplastics and Thermosets.
* Fabrication of polymers by Compression, Injection, Extrusion and Transfer Moulding. 
* Synthesis, properties and uses of common polymers, Conducting polymers and their applications.


## References
1. William D. Callister, Jr and David G. Rethwisch, *Materials Science and Engineering: An
Introduction*, 10th Edition, Wiley, USA .  
2. Colin N. Banwell and Elaine M. McCash, *Fundamentals of Molecular Spectroscopy*,  McGraw Hill
Book  
3. Jeffery, G.H Bassett, J Mendham, J Denney, R.C. (1989) , *Vogel’s Textbook of Quantitative
Chemical*.  
