---
country: "india"
university: "jamia-millia-islamia
branch: "electrical-and-computer-science-engineering"
scheme: "2020"
semester: 1
course_code: "asb-103"
course_title: "engineering-mathematics-1"
language: "english"
contributor: "@ziyaudheenms"
---


# ASB102: Engineering Mathematics 1

## Course Objectives
* Master techniques for successive differentiation, function expansion (e.g., Taylor/Maclaurin series), and analyzing function behavior using partial derivatives, double points, and asymptotes.
* Develop skills in curve tracing, calculating curvature, and applying definite integrals to find area (quadrature), arc length (rectification), and the volume/surface area of solids of revolution.
* Understand fundamental concepts in two-variable calculus, compute Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors, analyze the consistency of systems of linear equations, and grasp the basics of vector spaces and linear transformations.
* Solve various types of ordinary differential equations and apply these solutions to model and solve practical problems.
* Learn the core concepts and basic methods for dealing with and solving partial differential equations.

## Course Outcomes
* **CO 1:** Successive differentiation, expansion of functions, partial derivatives, double points and asymptotes.
* **CO 2:** Tracing of curve of two-dimensional, curvature, quadrature, rectification, volume and surface
area of solids of revolutions.
* **CO 3:** Theory of two variable Calculus, Eigenvalues, Eigen vectors, consistency of system, vector space and linear transformations.
* **CO 4:** Solution of ordinary differential equations with its applications. 
* **CO 5:** Learning the concepts of partial differential equations. 

## Course Content

### Module - 1 (Calculus Of One Variable And Its Applications)
* Successive differentiation (Leibnitz's theorem of nth derivative), Maclaurin's and Taylor's expansion of a function.
* Double point and its nature. 
* Concavity, convexity and points of inflexion; Oblique and rectangular asymptotes. 
* Curve tracing (Cartesian and polar forms), Curvature, Radius of curvature (Cartesian and polar forms).

### Module - 2 (Calculus Of Several Variables And Its Applications)
* Partial derivatives and their geometrical interpretation, Total derivative, change of variables.
* Euler’s Theorem on Homogeneous Function, Taylor's expansion of a function of two and more variables; Leibnitz's rule for differentiation under the sign of integration.
*  Maxima and minima of a function of two and more variables including Lagrange's method.

### Module - 3 (Integration And Its Applications)
* Beta and Gamma Functions.
* Evaluation of multiple integrals by change of order of integration, applications of multiple integrals(Rectification, Volume and Surface of revolution).

### Module - 4 (Ordinary Differential Equations And Its Applications)
* Linear Differential Equations, Exact Differential Equations, complementary function and particular integral.
* Solution of ordinary linear differential equations of higher order with constant and variable coefficients.
* Orthogonal and isogonal trajectories of a family of curves.

### Module - 5 (Partial Differential Equations And Its Applications)
* Introduction to partial differential equations.
* Lagrange's method of undetermined multipliers for the solution of linear partial differential equations of first order.
* solution of nonlinear partial differential equations of first order by means of Charpit's methods.


## References
1. Quddus Khan, *Advanced Engineering Mathematics*, Tyrasons Publications, Delhi-110092, (2022).  
2. B. V. Raman, *Higher Engineering Mathematics*, McGraw Hill Education India, 26th edition 2016.
3. R. K. Jain and S. R. K. Iyengar, *Advanced Engineering Mathematical Narosa*, 5tr Edition, 2018.  
