---
country: "india"
university: "jamia-millia-islamia
branch: "electrical-and-computer-science-engineering"
scheme: "2020"
semester: 1
course_code: "ees-101"
course_title: "basics-of-electrical-engineering"
language: "english"
contributor: "@ziyaudheenms"
---


# EES101: Basics Of Electrical Engineering

## Course Objectives
* The course provides fundamental training in solving electrical circuits by applying Kirchhoff's Current Law (KCL), Kirchhoff's Voltage Law (KVL), and various essential network theorems.
* Students will develop an understanding of alternating current (AC) concepts, including phasors, waveforms, and the behavior of basic circuit components (resistors, inductors, capacitors) in AC circuits.
* This section focuses on the principles of magnetic circuits, including the ability to analyze and quantify different types of losses that occur within them (e.g., hysteresis and eddy current losses).
* A core focus is on DC machines and single-phase induction motors, covering their construction, operating principles, and practical applications.
* The course introduces a broad range of electrical machines beyond DC/single-phase types, covering their classification, operation, and diverse industrial applications.

## Course Outcomes
* **CO 1:** To solve electrical circuits applying KCL, KVL and network theorems.
* **CO 2:** To understand the concept of phasors, waveforms and behaviour of basic electric circuit components.
* **CO 3:** To analyze the various types of losses in magnetic circuits.
* **CO 4:** To understand the construction, operation and applications of DC machines and single phase
induction motors. 
* **CO 5:** To introduce various types of electrical machines and its applications.

## Course Content

### Module - 1 (UNIT-1)
* Kirchoff’s laws, node voltage and mesh current methods, delta-star and star-delta conversion.
* Classification of network elements, superposition principle. 
* Thevenin’s and Norton’s theorems.

### Module - 2 (UNIT-2)
* Single phase AC circuits.
* Average and effective values of sinusoids, solution of R,L,C series circuits, the j operator, complex representation of impedances,
* phasor diagram, power factor, power in complex notation, solution of parallel and series-parallel circuits, resonance.
* Introduction to balance three phase AC circuits.

### Module - 3 (UNIT-3)
* Introduction to magnetic circuits, analogy between electrical and magnetic circuit.
* Simple magnetic circuit with DC and AC excitations-Faraday's laws, induced emfs and inductances, magnetic leakages.
* B-H curve, hysteresis and eddy current loss, magnetic circuit calculations, mutual coupling.

### Module - 4 (UNIT-4)
* Single Phase Transformers- Principle of operation, construction.
* E.M.F equation, ratings, phasor diagram for no-load and full load.
* Equivalent circuit, power losses, regulation and efficiency calculations, open
circuit and short circuit tests.
* Introduction to auto-transformer.

### Module - 5 (UNIT-5)
* Types of electrical machines.
* Working principle and construction of DC and AC machines.
* domestic and industrial applications of various types of electrical machines. 


## References
1. S.S. Parker, *Problems in Electrical Engineering*, Asia Publishing House.  
2. H. Cotton, *Advanced Electrical Technology*, Pitman, London.
3. T. L. Floyd, *Electrical & Electronic Technology*, Revised by John Hiley, Keith Brown and Ian Mckenzie
Smith, Pearson.  
