---
country: "india"
university: "jamia-millia-islamia
branch: "electrical-and-computer-science-engineering"
scheme: "2020"
semester: 1
course_code: "css-101"
course_title: "fundamentals-of-computing"
language: "english"
contributor: "@ziyaudheenms"
---


# CSS101: Fundmentals Of Computing

## Course Objectives
* Understand the basics, generations, and types of computers, along with proficiency in different number systems used in computing.
* Grasp the concepts of algorithms and flowcharts as problem-solving tools, and learn the fundamental syntax and structure of C programming.
* Develop the ability to implement and utilize looping structures (e.g., for, while, do-while) and effectively handle arrays in C programming for data management.
* Apply core programming concepts to implement and execute fundamental searching and sorting techniques (e.g, linear search, bubble sort) using the C programming language.
* Describe the types and essential functions of operating systems and understand the basics of computer networking and the Internet.

## Course Outcomes
* **CO 1:** Students will be able to understand the basics of computer, generation and types of computer and Number system.
* **CO 2:** Student will be able to understand the concept of algorithms, flowchart and C programming basics.
* **CO 3:** Student will be able to implement loops and array in C programming. 
* **CO 4:** Students will be able to apply the concepts of searching and sorting techniques in C programming.
* **CO 5:** Students will be able to describe different types of operating systems and its functions and 
they will understand basics of computer networking and internet. 

## Course Content

### Module - 1 (Basics Of Computers)
* Computer fundamentals, Bits and Bytes, CPU, Memory, Types of memory, Input and output devices, Operating system.
* Application software, system software, generation of computer
* classification of computer Number system:decimal number system, binary number system, octal number system, hexadecimal number system. 

### Module - 2 (Introduction To C Programming)
* Introduction to Programming Language, Compiler, Interpreter, Algorithms, flow chart.
*  C character set, C-tokens:constants, variable, keywords, Data types, operator and expressions.
*  Decision controls: if-else, if-else ladder,nested if-else,conditional operator, switch case

### Module - 3 (Loop And Array)
* For loop, while loop and do-while loop, continue and break statement.
* Function: inbuilt and user defined functions,call by value and call by reference.
* Array: Single dimensional array. 2D array, multidimensional array,Operations on array

### Module - 4 (Searching And Sorting)
* Pointers, searching and sorting.
* Searching techniques: linear search, binary search.
* Sorting techniques: bubble sort,selection sort, Strings.
* Library string functions.

### Module - 5 (Operating System & Networking)
* OS definition, role of OS in computer system, multi programming, time sharing OS, multitasking OS, multiprocessing OS, real time system OS, client server computing, distributed OS, functions of OS.
* Computer Network, transmission media, network topologies, LAN, WAN, MAN, Internet, ISP, WWW, Email, URL, Web browsers, websites, intranet.
* Latest Technologies in IT. 


## References
1. Kamthane, A. N. (2011), *Programming in C*, Pearson Education India.  
2. Doja, M. N. (2005), *Fundamentals of Computers and Information Technology*.
3. Yashwant K, *Let us C*, 8th edition, BPB publication.