---
country: "india"
university: "jamia-millia-islamia"
branch: "electrical-and-computer-science-engineering"
scheme: "2020"
semester: 1
course_code: "asl-101"
course_title: "language-laboratory"
language: "english"
contributor: "@ziyaudheenms"
---


# ASL101: Language Laboratory

## Course Objectives
* Achieve proficiency in the English language, focusing on clear and effective communication skills.
* Enhance and develop a well-rounded personality, emphasizing professional and interpersonal effectiveness.
* Cultivate strong ideation skills (generating and refining ideas) and exposition skills (clear and persuasive communication and presentation).
* Sharpen interpretative, logical, creative, and imaginative skills for holistic cognitive development and problem-solving.
* Foster human sensibilities and ethical awareness while exploring ways to integrate technology effectively with the broader human experiencen.

## Course Outcomes
* **CO 1:** Gaining proficiency in English.
* **CO 2:** Developing personality.
* **CO 3:** Inculcating ideation and exposition skills. 
* **CO 4:** Honing the interpretative, logical, creative and imaginative skills.
* **CO 5:** Creating human sensibilities and forge convergences of technology with larger humanity.

## Course Content

### Module - 1 (UNIT 1)
* Self-Introduction.
* Presentation Skills.
* Group Discussions.

### Module - 2 (UNIT 2)
* Personal Interviews.
* Formal Conversation.
* Chit-Chat.

### Module - 3 (UNIT 3)
* Topic Expressions/ Oration.
* Word Games.
* Debates.
*  Simulated discussion.

### Module - 4 (UNIT 4)
* Personality Development.
* Resume writing.
* Book Reviews.

### Module - 5 (UNIT 5)
* Affirmative body language/gestures.
* Voice modulation.


## References
