---
country: "india"
university: "jamia-millia-islamia"
branch: "electrical-and-computer-science-engineering"
scheme: "2020"
semester: 1
course_code: "mel-101"
course_title: "engineering-graphics-design"
language: "english"
contributor: "@ziyaudheenms"
---


# MEL101: Engineering Graphics & Design

## Course Objectives
* Understand the basics of engineering drawing and the fundamental principles involved in the design of engineering components.
* Develop the ability to correctly interpret and apply different scaling techniques to engineering designs and drawings.
* Master the skill of generating and interpreting different standard views (orthographic projections) of any three-dimensional object.
* Understand the methods used to represent and analyze the detailed construction and assembly of complex engineering objects.
* Learn the basic concepts and techniques involved in sheet metal fabrication and pattern development.

## Course Outcomes
* **CO 1:** Student will able to understand basics of drawing and design of engineering components.
* **CO 2:** Student will able to understand scaling of designs.
* **CO 3:** Student will able to understand the different view of any object. 
* **CO 4:** Student will able to understand detail construction of any object.
* **CO 5:** Student will able to understand sheet metal work. 

## Course Content

### Module - 1 (Orthographic Projection)
* Conversion of pictorial/ isometric views into orthographic views of machine blocks.
* Identification of surface in orthographic views.
* Some practice on an AutoCAD package. 

### Module - 2 (Isometric Projection)
* Isometric scale, isometric projection of solids, missing line and missing views.
* Isometric view of simple objects when their orthographic views are given.
* Preparation of isometric views using an AutoCAD package.

### Module - 3 (Sectioning)
* Conventional representation in the section of engineering materials.
* Methods of sectioning, sectional views of machine components, brackets, bushed bearing and foot step bearing.

### Module - 4 (Fasteners)
* Sketches of different types of threads.
*  permanent fasteners (riveted and welded joints), temporary fasteners (nut and bolt assembly, studs, keys. etc.). 

### Module - 5 (Building Drawings)
* Symbols of electrical and sanitary items.
* Terminology used in building drawing, plan and elevation of 2/3-
rooms building using Auto-CAD package.
* from corrosion, refractories, their manufacturer and properties:
neutral, acid and basic refractors; glass its types and manufacture. 


## References
1. A.N. Siddiqui, Z.A. Khan and Mukhtar, *Engineering Graphics with Primer on Auto-cad*.  
2. N.D. Bhutt, *Engineering Drawing*.