---
country: "india"
university: "jamia-millia-islamia
branch: "electrical-and-computer-science-engineering"
scheme: "2020"
semester: 1
course_code: "asl-104"
course_title: "design-thinking-idea-lab"
language: "english"
contributor: "@ziyaudheenms"
---


# ASL104: Design Thinking & Idea Lab

## Course Objectives
* Understand the basic concepts of design thinking and innovation, along with learning the essential elements of design.
* Gain knowledge of the systematic design process and its application in effectively driving inventions and creative solutions.
* Understand the various tools and methodologies of design thinking and their practical implementation in problem-solving.
* Apply the principles of design thinking specifically to the context of startups and entrepreneurial ventures.
* Acquire knowledge of machine learning concepts and utilize design thinking techniques to solve problems across various sectors and disciplines.

## Course Outcomes
* **CO 1:** Understanding basic concept of design thinking and innovation and learning elements of design.
* **CO 2:** Knowing of the design process and its implementation in driving inventions.
* **CO 3:** Understanding tools of design thinking. Knowing the implementation of design thinking. 
* **CO 4:** Understanding design thinking for startups.
* **CO 5:** Gaining the knowledge of machine learning in different sectors. Apply the design thinking
techniques for solving problems in various sectors. 

## Course Content

### Module - 1 (UNIT 1)
* Conversion of pictorial/ isometric views into orthographic views of machine blocks.
* Identification of surface in orthographic views.
* Some practice on an AutoCAD package. 

### Module - 2 (UNIT 2)
* Isometric scale, isometric projection of solids, missing line and missing views.
* Isometric view of simple objects when their orthographic views are given.
* Preparation of isometric views using an AutoCAD package.

### Module - 3 (UNIT 3)
* Conventional representation in the section of engineering materials.
* Methods of sectioning, sectional views of machine components, brackets, bushed bearing and foot step bearing.

### Module - 4 (UNIT 4)
* Sketches of different types of threads.
*  permanent fasteners (riveted and welded joints), temporary fasteners (nut and bolt assembly, studs, keys. etc.). 

### Module - 5 (UNIT 5)
* Symbols of electrical and sanitary items.
* Terminology used in building drawing, plan and elevation of 2/3-
rooms building using Auto-CAD package.
* from corrosion, refractories, their manufacturer and properties:
neutral, acid and basic refractors; glass its types and manufacture. 


## References
1. Shrrutin N Shetty, *Design the Future*, Norton Pres.  
2. A.K. Chitale and R.C. Gupta, *Product Design and Manufacturing*, Prentice Hall.
2. Chesbrough. H, *The era of open innovation*.