---
country: "india"
university: "cusat"
branch: "msc-environmental-science-and-technology"
semester: "2"
course_code: "24-360-0202"
course_title: "geo-informatics"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# 24-360-0202: 
  - (GEO-INFORMATICS

## Course Objectives

)
* This course offers a thorough introduction to the fundamental principles and practical applications of Remote Sensing, Geographic Information Systems (GIS), and Cartography and Surveying Techniques. Starting with the basics of remote sensing, it progresses to detailed image processing techniques for data analysis and interpretation. This includes an exploration of essentials of GIS, from components and data management to spatial analysis and applications, before concluding with foundational cartography concepts and modern surveying methods. Designed to equip students with both theoretical understanding and practical skills, this course prepares participants for effective application in environmental management, geographical analysis, and beyond, bridging technology and real-world challenges.

## Course Outcomes
* **CO 1:** Gain knowledge of the principles and concepts of Remote Sensing and its applications.
* **CO 2:** Acquire knowledge on analysing and interpreting remote sensing data through visual interpretation and image processing techniques.
* **CO 3:** Understand GIS fundamentals, data management, and spatial analysis.
* **CO 4:** Explore cartography, focusing on map making and GPS technology.


## Course Content
# ## Module 1:
  ((Introduction to Remote Sensing)
* Basic concepts and processes
* Remote Sensing System Classification
* Sensor and Platforms
* Sensor parameters
* Resolution
* Spectral Bands
* Interaction of Energy
* RS Satellites
* RS Applications

# ## Module 2:
  ((Basics of Image Processing)
* Data Analysis and Interpretations
* Visual Interpretation
* Photoelements
* Steps in image interpretation
* Elements of Image Interpretation
* Basics of Digital Image Processing
* Image Rectifications and Corrections
* Image enhancement
* Image Classification

# ## Module 3:
  ((Introduction to GIS)
* Components of GIS
* GIS data base
* Spatial features
* Data structure and Models,
* GIS Data Inputting and Outputting
* Georeferencing
* Basics of Spatial analysis
* Vector and Raster Data Manipulation
* Surface Modelling
* Terrain Models
* Interpolation
* Geocoding
* Network Analysis
* Digital Terrain Models
* Data Storage
* GIS Applications

# ## Module 4:
  ((Basics of Cartography and Surveying Techniques)
* Basic conceptsMap scale
* Map classification
* Map elements
* Geographical co-ordinates
* Map Projections
* Geodetic Datum
* Topology
* Global Position System
* Survey
  GPS survey
  DGPS survey

## Course Objectives
* This course offers a thorough introduction to the fundamental principles and practical applications of Remote Sensing, Geographic Information Systems (GIS), and Cartography and Surveying Techniques. Starting with the basics of remote sensing, it progresses to detailed image processing techniques for data analysis and interpretation. This includes an exploration of essentials of GIS, from components and data management to spatial analysis and applications, before concluding with foundational cartography concepts and modern surveying methods. Designed to equip students with both theoretical understanding and practical skills, this course prepares participants for effective application in environmental management, geographical analysis, and beyond, bridging technology and real-world challenges.
