---
country: "india"
university: "a-p-j-abdul-kalam-technological-university"
branch: "mca-integrated"
version: "2020"
semester: 10
course_code: "20INMCA504"
course_title: "seminar"
language: "english"
contributor: "@geogeorge46"
---

# 20INMCA504 - Seminar

This course intends to enable the students to gain knowledge in any of the technically relevant current topics on Computer Science or Information Technology, and to acquire confidence in presenting the topic and preparing a report.

## Course Outcomes
After the completion of the course, the student will be able to:

- **CO 1:** Annotate the ideas presented in technical papers  
- **CO 2:** Comprehend a concept by referring different technical documents  
- **CO 3:** Prepare technical documents  
- **CO 4:** Present a topic before an audience  
- **CO 5:** Interact with the audience  

## Mark Distribution

| Assessment Criteria        | Total Marks |
|----------------------------|------------|
| CIE                        | 50         |
| ESE                        | 50         |

### Division of Marks
- Scope and relevance of topic & Quality of presentation slides – 20%  
- Presentation skills – 10%  
- Knowledge in the topic – 30%  
- Report – 20%  
- Evaluation by Faculty Guide – 20 Marks  
- Evaluation by Faculty Committee – 30 Marks  

## Guidelines
- Students shall conduct a detailed study on a technically relevant current topic in Computer Science / Information Technology under the supervision of a Faculty Guide and present it as a seminar at the end of the study.  
- The study may be conducted on:  
  - Articles published in reputed journals/conference proceedings  
  - Recent development in Computer Science / Information Technology  
  - Recent research and development activity in a research lab  
  - Latest software tool or framework  
- Students shall submit an abstract on the identified topic and get prior approval from the Faculty Guide before the study begins.  
- The student shall submit a seminar report, based on the study and their findings. The report shall not be a reproduction of original paper or manual.  
- The study and its findings shall be presented in the class taking a duration of 15-20 minutes.  
- LaTeX or an equivalent tool shall be used for preparing Presentations and Seminar Report.  
- Students shall be encouraged to publish their study in journals and due credit shall be given to such students.  
- A committee of three senior faculty members shall be constituted by the head of the department and the seminar presentation shall be evaluated by that committee.
