---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "mca"
version: "2019"
semester: 2
course_code: "RLMCA102"
course_title: "Object Oriented Programming"
language: "english"
contributor: "@swaminadhan"
---


# RLMCA102: Object Oriented Programming 

## Course Objectives

- To understand the concepts of object-oriented programming paradigms and develop skills
  in these paradigms using Java
- To provide an overview of characteristics of Java Applets, Exceptions, Multithreading,
  Streams, Networking etc


### Module - 1 

-Introduction:Need for OOP paradigm, Procedural approach
vs. Object-Oriented approach. Object Oriented concepts
Java Basics:History of Java, Java features, data types,
variables, operators, expressions, control statements, type
conversion and casting, Concepts of - classes, objects,
constructors, Access Specifiers (public, private, protected,
friendly), Access Modifiers (static, final, abstract, native,
synchronized), overloading methods, recursion, nested and
inner classes

### Module - 2 

-Inheritance:Generalizations vs. Specialization, Inheriting
data members and methods, Single and Multilevel
inheritance, use of super and this keywords.
Polymorphism- method overriding, dynamic method
dispatch, abstract and final classes

### Module - 3

-Arrays and Strings:One dimensional arrays,
Multidimensional arrays, exploring String class and
methods, String Buffer class.
Interface:creation and implementation of an Interface.
Packages - creating and accessing a package, importing
packages, creating user defined packages

### Module - 4

-Exception Handling:benefits of exception handling,
exception hierarchy, usage of try, catch, throw, throws and
finally, built-in exceptions, creating own exception sub
classes.
Multithreaded Programming:thread life cycle, creating
threads, thread priorities, synchronizing threads, Inter
Thread Communication

### Module - 5

-Exploring Java I/O, Streams, Byte Streams, Character
Streams, Random Access Files, Object Streams.
### Module - 6

-Applets – Applets and Applications, life cycle of an applet,
passing parameters to an applet, HTML tags.
Working with Graphics, Colors.
Networking:client-server model, Sockets, Inlet Address,
TCP sockets – Server Socket and Socket classes, UDP
Sockets – Datagram Socket, Datagram Packets.

## References

-C. Thomas Wu, “An introduction to Object-oriented programming with Java”, Fourth
Edition, Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing company Ltd.
-Y. Daniel Liang, “Introduction to Java programming”, Seventh Edition, Pearson
Education.
-Timothy Budd, “Understanding Object-oriented programming with Java”, Updated
Edition, Pearson Education
-Rohit Khurana, “Programming with Java”, Vikas Publishing, 2014.



