---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "mca"
version: "2019"
semester: 2
course_code: "RLMCA104"
course_title: "Data Structures"
language: "english"
contributor: "@swaminadhan"
---

# RLMCA104: Data Structures

## Course Objectives

- To provide an insight into data structures such as arrays linked lists, stacks, queues, trees and graphs
- To provide an understanding of searching and sorting methods


### Module - 1 

-Data structures:Definitions, Overview of data structures
Analysis of Algorithm-Asymptotic Complexity of an algorithm. 
-Arrays:Definition, Terminology, One dimensional Array,
Two dimensional array, Multidimensional array,
Representation of Arrays in Memory, Operations on
Arrays, Applications of Arrays, Sparse Matrices
Manipulation.

### Module - 2 

-Stack-Introduction, Representation of a Stack, Operations on
Stacks, Applications of Stacks - Evaluation of Arithmetic
expressions – Recursion and Iteration

### Module - 3

-Queues-Introduction, Representation of a queue -Operations
on Queues, Circular Queues, Deque, Priority Queue,
Applications of Queues

### Module - 4

-Linked List-Singly Linked Lists, Circular Linked Lists,
Doubly Linked Lists - Applications of Linked ListsPolynomial Representation-Linked stacks and Queues.

### Module - 5

-Trees, Binary Trees, Representation and Traversals, BST
and operations –Introduction to AVL trees.
Graphs:Definitions and Basic Terminologies,
Representations of Graphs, Traversals, Minimum Spanning
Tree and shortest path algorithms

### Module - 6

-Internal sorting – selection, bubble, insertion, merge sorting,
and partition exchange sorting, heap sort, Counting Sort.
Time Complexities- comparisons.
Searching – linear search, binary search.

## References

-A N Kamthane , ”Introduction to Data Structures in C”, Pearson Education (2005)
-Alfred V. Aho, John E. Hopcroft, Jeffrey D. Ullman “Data structures and Algorithms”,
Fourth Edition, Pearson Education (2009)
-G A V Pai , “Data Structures and Algorithms:Concepts, Techniques and
Applications”, 2nd Edition, Tata McGraw-Hill (2008)
-Thomas H. Corman, Charles E. Leiserson and Ronald L. Rivest., “Introduction to
Algorithms”, 3rd Edition, Prentice Hall of India.



