---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "mca"
version: "2019"
semester: 2
course_code: "RLMCA112"
course_title: "Computer Organization & Architectures"
language: "english"
contributor: "@swaminadhan"
---

# RLMCA112: Computer Organization & Architectures 

## Course Objectives

-  To introduce computer architecture and organization, with a special focus on the basic principles underlying micro-processor design.

- To explore the interaction of hardware and software, and consider the efficient use of hardware to achieve high performance



### Module - 1 

-Basic Structure of digital computer - functional units - basic
operational concepts – bus structures - software. Memory
locations and addresses – Instructions and instruction
sequencing – basic instruction types – Instruction execution
and straight line sequencing – branching

### Module - 2 

-Addressing modes, assembly language. Basic I/O
operations, stacks, subroutines – nesting and processor stack
–parameter passing.

### Module - 3

-Basic processing unit – fundamental concepts - execution of
a complete instruction – multiple bus organization -
sequencing of control signals – Hardwired control and
microprogrammed control.

### Module - 4

-Pipelining – basic concepts only. I/O organization –
Accessing I/O devices, Interrupts – handling - use of
interrupts in operating systems, DMA. Interface circuits –
parallel port – serial port. Standard I/O interfaces – PCI –
SCSI and USB in brief.

### Module - 5

-Memory organization – basic concepts, semiconductor RAM
memories - memory system considerations – semiconductor
ROM memories - speed, size and cost. Memory design using
decoders.

### Module - 6

-Cache memory – mapping functions – replacement
algorithms, multiple module memories and interleaving.
Virtual memory – paging and segmentation, RAID.


## References

-Hamachar, Vranesic & Zaky, “Computer Organization” (5th Ed), McGraw Hill
-J. Hennessy and D. Patterson, “Computer Architecture, A quantitative approach”, 5th
Edition, Elsevier
-Miles Murdocca, Vincent Heuring, “Computer Architecture and Organization, an
integrated approach”, (2007 Ed), Wiley..
-J. Hennessy and D. Patterson, “Computer Architecture, A quantitative approach”, 5th
Edition, Elsevier




