---
university: "ktu"
branch: "mechanical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: "6"
course_code: "met302"
course_title: "heat-and-mass-transfer"
language: "english"
contributor: "@AkhilaSunesh"
---

# MET302: Heat and Mass Transfer

## Course Objectives
* Introduce the various modes of heat transfer and develop methodologies for solving a wide variety of practical heat transfer problems.  
* Provide useful information concerning the performance and design of simple heat transfer systems.  
* Conceive the energy balance in any thermal practical situation involving heat transfer mechanisms.  
* Introduce mass transfer.  

## Course Content
### Module - 1 (Conduction Heat Transfer)
* Introduction to heat transfer – thermodynamics and heat transfer – typical heat transfer situations – modes of heat transfer – mechanism of heat transfer – basic laws of heat transfer – thermal conductivity – effect of temperature on thermal conductivity – combined heat transfer mechanism – real life situations of combined heat transfer.  
* Differential equations of heat conduction – boundary conditions and initial conditions, one dimensional steady state situations – plane wall, cylinder, sphere – concept of thermal resistance, critical radius, conduction with heat generation.  
* Two-dimensional steady state situations, transient conduction, Lumped capacitance model, concept of Heisler chart and Schmidt Plot – Conduction shape factor – Numerical methods of analysis – thermal analysis of rectangular fins.  

### Module - 2 (Convection Heat Transfer)
* Fundamentals, order of magnitude analysis of momentum and energy equations.  
* Hydrodynamic and thermal boundary layers – Relation between fluid friction and heat transfer – Concepts of fluid mechanics, Differential equation of heat convection.  
* Laminar flow heat transfer in circular pipe – constant heat flux and constant wall temperature, thermal entrance region.  
* Turbulent flow heat transfer in circular pipe, pipes of other cross sections.  
* Heat transfer in laminar flow and turbulent flow over a flat plate, Reynolds analogy.  
* Flow across a cylinder and sphere.  
* Natural convection – basics – free convection heat transfer on a vertical flat plate – empirical relations for free convection heat transfer.  

### Module - 3 (Heat Exchangers)
* Condensation heat transfer phenomena – the condensation number.  
* Boiling heat transfer phenomena – Simplified relations for boiling heat transfer.  
* Introduction to heat exchangers – types of heat exchangers – the overall heat transfer coefficient – Fouling factor.  
* LMTD analysis of heat exchangers – effectiveness – NTU method – Analysis of variable properties – compact heat exchangers – heat exchanger design considerations.  

### Module - 4 (Radiation Heat Transfer)
* Physical mechanism of radiation heat transfer.  
* Radiation properties – Black body radiation, Planck’s law, Wein’s displacement law, Stefan Boltzmann law, Kirchoff’s law.  
* Gray body radiation, shape factors, heat exchange between non-black bodies, Infinite parallel planes.  
* Radiation combined with conduction and convection.  

### Module - 5 (Mass Transfer)
* Introduction to mass transfer.  
* Molecular diffusion in fluids – Steady state molecular diffusion in fluids under stagnant and laminar flow conditions – Fick’s law of diffusion.  
* Types of solid diffusion – mass transfer coefficients in laminar and turbulent flows.  
* Introduction to mass transfer coefficient – Equimolar counter-diffusion – Correlation for convective mass transfer coefficient – Correlation of mass transfer coefficients for single cylinder.  
* Theories of mass transfer – Overall mass transfer coefficients.  

## References
* Sachdeva R.C., *Fundamentals of Engineering Heat and Mass Transfer*, New Age Science Limited, 2009.  
* R.K. Rajput, *Heat and Mass Transfer*, S. Chand & Co., 2015.  
* Nag P.K., *Heat and Mass Transfer*, McGraw Hill, 2011.  
* Kothandaraman C.P., *Fundamentals of Heat and Mass Transfer*, New Age International, 2006.  
* C.P. Kothandaraman, S. Subramanya, *Heat and Mass Transfer Data Book*, New Age International, 2014.  
* Holman J.P., *Heat Transfer*, McGraw-Hill, 10th Edition, 2009.  
* Yunus A. Cengel, *Heat and Mass Transfer: Fundamentals and Applications*, McGraw-Hill Higher Education, 6th Edition, 2019.  
* Frank P. Incropera and David P. Dewitt, *Heat and Mass Transfer*, John Wiley and Sons, 2011.  
