---
university: "ktu"
branch: "mechanical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: "6"
course_code: "met306"
course_title: "advanced-manufacturing-engineering"
language: "english"
contributor: "@AkhilaSunesh"
---

# MET306: Advanced Manufacturing Engineering

## Course Objectives
* Understand the capabilities, limitations of conventional manufacturing and machining processes and the need of advanced manufacturing processes.  
* Formulate tool path and program CNC machines.  
* Understand how PLC operates and controls automated equipment and systems.  
* Recognize the need of atomic level surface roughness and machining processes.  
* Understand the need of high velocity forming of metals.  

## Course Content
### Module - 1 (Powder Metallurgy and Metal Cutting)
* Powder metallurgy – Powder production – Powder characteristics – Mixing – Compaction techniques – Sintering.  
* Theory of metal cutting – Orthogonal and oblique cutting – Chip formation – Merchant’s theory – Friction force.  
* Cutting tool materials – Thermal aspects of machining – Tool wear and wear mechanisms – Economics of machining – Machinability – Cutting fluids.  

### Module - 2 (PLC and CNC)
* Programmable Logic Controllers (PLC).  
* CNC systems – Contouring systems – Principle of operation – DDA integrator: principle of operation, exponential deceleration – Linear, circular and complete interpolator.  
* NC part programming – Computer aided part programming – Machining centers – Feedback devices.  

### Module - 3 (Non-Traditional Machining Processes)
* EDM, USM, ECM, LBM, EBM, PAM, IBM, AJM, AWJM.  

### Module - 4 (High Velocity Forming)
* High velocity forming of metals.  
* Sheet metal forming – Explosive forming – Electro hydraulic forming – Electro magnetic forming.  

### Module - 5 (Micromachining and Additive Manufacturing)
* Micromachining – Diamond turn mechanism.  
* Advanced finishing processes – Abrasive flow machining, Magnetic abrasive finishing, Magnetorheological finishing, Magnetorheological abrasive flow finishing, Magnetic float polishing, Elastic emission machining.  
* Material addition processes – Stereolithography, Selective laser sintering, Fused deposition modeling, Laminated object manufacturing, Laser engineered net-shaping, Laser welding, LIGA process.  

## References
* Yoram Koren, *Computer Control of Manufacturing Systems*, TMH.  
* Jain V.K., *Introduction to Micromachining*, Narosa Publishers.  
* Davies K. and Austin E.R., *Developments in High Speed Metal Forming*, The Machinery Publishing Co, 1970.  
* ASTME, *High Velocity Forming of Metals*, PHI, 1968.  
* Ibrahim Zeid, R. Sivasubrahmanian, *CAD/CAM: Theory & Practice*, Tata McGraw Hill, 1987.  
* P. Groover and E.M. Zimmers Jr., *CAD/CAM: Computer Aided Design and Manufacturing*, Prentice Hall of India, 1987.  
* Petruzella Frank D., *Programmable Logic Controllers*.  
* Jain V.K., *Advanced Machining Processes*.  
* Armarego and Brown, *The Machining of Metals*, Prentice Hall.  
* Paul H. Black, *Theory of Metal Cutting*, McGraw Hill.  
* ASM Handbook Volume 16, *Machining*, ASM International, 1989.  
* Lal G.K., *Introduction to Machining Science*, New Age Publishers.
