---
university: "ktu"
branch: "mechanical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 6
course_code: "met332"
course_title: "advanced-mechanics-of-solids"
language: "english"
contributor: "@AkhilaSunesh"
---

# MET332: Advanced Mechanics of Solids

## Course Objectives

- formulate the field equations of elasticity.  
- model engineering problems as two-dimensional, for easy solutions involving a stress function.  
- develop solutions for axi-symmetric problems for applications in thick pressure vessels and in rotating circular discs.  
- extend the basic ideas related to theory of elastic flexure, for skewed loading and for beams which are curved.  
- apply solution methods for torsion in components with non-circular cross sections and thin walled structures.  

## Course Content

### Module - 1  
Field equations of elasticity: equations of equilibrium in rectangular and cylindrical polar coordinates – strain-displacement-relations - constitutive equations. Boundary value problems: different boundary conditions- examples for displacement formulation/ force formulation. Compatibility equations - uniqueness of solution and superposition- st. venant’s principle.  

### Module - 2  
Two dimensional problems in elasticity: stress-strain relations for plane stress and plane strain cases. Airy’s stress functions for solution of stresses: problems in rectangular as well as in polar coordinates- contact stresses due to concentrated normal force (line load) on a straight boundary using airy’s stress function, and its extension to solve for stresses due to uniform normal pressure.  

### Module - 3  
Axisymmetric problems: thin cylinders pressurized from inside, and thick cylinders pressurized from inside and outside - rotating disks.  

### Module - 4  
Unsymmetrical bending of straight beams possessing two axes of symmetry-shear center- winkler bach theory for bending of curved beams (with rectangular cross-section).  

### Module - 5  
Torsion of non-circular bars: st. venant’s and prandtl’s methods- solutions for elliptical cress-section. Membrane analogy –torsion of thin walled closed sections.  

## References

- nambudiripad k. b. m, “advanced mechanics of solids- a gentle introduction”, narosa publishing house, first edition, 2018.  
- srinath l. s., “advanced mechanics of solids”, tata mcgraw hill publishing company, third edition, 2009.  
- jose s., “advanced mechanics of materials”, pentagon educational services, second edition, 2017.  
- anil lal s., “advanced mechanics of solids”, siva publications and distributors, first edition, 2017.  
- ragab a. r. and bayoumi s. e., “engineering solid mechanics, fundamentals and applications”, crc press, first edition, 2018.  
- timoshenko s. p., and goodier j. n., “theory of elasticity”, mcgraw hill (india), private limited, new delhi, third edition, 2010.  
- sadd m. h., “elasticity: theory, applications and numerics”, academic press, indian reprint, 2nd edition, 2012.  
