---
university: "ktu"
branch: "mechanical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: "6"
course_code: "met342"
course_title: "ic-engine-combustion-and-pollution"
language: "english"
contributor: "@AkhilaSunesh"
---

# MET342: IC Engine Combustion and Pollution

## Course Objectives
* Explain the basic concepts of fuel air mixing 
* Understand the combustion process of SI engine 
* Understand the combustion process of CI engine 
* Explore various alternate fuels in IC engine 
* Describe emission control technologies of IC engine

## Course Content

### Module - 1 
* Engine design and operating parameters, Thermo chemistry of fuel-air mixtures 
* Properties of working fluids- unburned mixture composition, burned mixture charts, Exhaust gas composition. 

### Module - 2 
* Ideal models of engine cycles, Availability analysis of engine processes. 
* Combustion in SI engines- Thermodynamic analysis, Flame structure and speed, Cyclic variations in combustion, partial burning and misfire, abnormal combustion. 

### Module - 3 
* Combustion in CI engines- Phenomenological model of CI engine combustion, Analysis of cylinder pressure data, fuel spray behaviour. 

### Module - 4 
* Utilization of alternate fuels in IC engines- biodiesel, hydrogen, LPG, Natural gas- Advantages and disadvantages. 
* HCCI combustion, ASTM specifications. 

### Module - 5 
* Engine emission and air pollution- Genesis and formation of pollutants. 
* SI engine emission control technology - CI engine emission control technology, fuel quality, emission standards. 

## References

### Text Books
* Ganesan, *Internal combustion engines*, Tata- McGraw Hill Publishers, 2002.  
* Ramalingam, K.K., *Internal Combustion Engines*, Scitech Publications (India) Pvt. Ltd., 2004.  
* F Obert, *IC Engines and air pollution*, Intext Educational Publishers, 1973.  
* Mathur, M.L., and Sharma, R.P., *A Course in Internal Combustion Engines*, Dhanpat Rai Publications, 1993.  

### Reference Books
* Heywood J.B., *IC Engine Fundamentals*, McGraw Hill Book Co, 1989.  
* W.W. Pulkrabek, *Engineering Fundamentals of the IC Engine*, 2nd Edition, PHI, 2003.  
* B.P. Pundir, *Engine Emissions: Pollutant Formation and Advances in Control Technology*, Narosa Publication, 2007.  
