---
university: "ktu"
branch: "mechanical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 6
course_code: "met372"
course_title: "advanced-metal-joining-techniques"
language: "english"
contributor: "@AkhilaSunesh"
---

# MET372: Advanced Metal Joining Techniques

## Course Objectives

* This course provides student to learn fundamental concepts of advanced welding techniques and their applications to an extent to enable the learner to arrive at a firsthand conclusion on selection of a particular technique best suited to resolve a metal joining problem.

## Course Content

### Module - 1
* Radiant energy welding: Electron Beam Welding (EBW) - principle and theory- equipment and systems- process characteristics and variables- weld joint design- applications- EBW process variants. Laser Beam Welding-principle and theory-operation-types of lasers-process variables and characteristics-applications.

### Module - 2
* Diffusion welding-principle and theory-methods- welding parameters-advantages and limitations- applications. Cold pressure welding-process, equipment and set-up-applications. Adhesive Bonding- principle and theory-types of adhesives-joint design-bonding methods- applications.

### Module - 3
* Explosive welding-principle and theory-process variables-equipment-joint design-advantages and limitations-applications. Friction welding-principle and theory-process variables-advantages and limitations-applications. Friction stir welding- metal flow phenomena-tools-process variables- applications.

### Module - 4
* Ultrasonic welding-principle and theory-process variables and equipment-types of ultrasonic welds- advantages and limitations-applications. Brazing- principle- brazing processes-torch brazing- furnace brazing- vacuum brazing-induction brazing-advantages and limitations-applications.

### Module - 5
* Plasma arc welding –principle and theory- transferred arc and non-transferred arc techniques- equipment-advantages and limitations-applications. Magnetically impelled arc butt (MIAB) welding- principle of operation-applications. Under water welding-wet and dry under water welding- set-up for underwater welding systems.

## References

* Parmar R.S., Welding Processes and Technology, Khanna Publishers, Delhi, 1998.
* ASM Metals Handbook “Welding and Brazing”, Vol.6, ASM, Ohio, 1988.
* Parmar R.S., “Welding Engineering and Technology” Khanna Publishers, Delhi, 1997.
* Rossi, B.E., Welding Engineering, Mc Graw-Hill, 1954.
* Schwartz M.M., “Metal Joining Manual”, McGraw-Hill Inc., 1979.
* Udin et al., Welding for Engineers, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1967.
* Welding Engineers Handbook – ASHE Vol. I, II, III, IV.
