---
university: "ktu"
branch: "mechanical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 6
course_code: "met382"
course_title: "machine-design"
language: "english"
contributor: "@AkhilaSunesh"
---

# MET382: Machine Design

## Course Objectives

* To calculate the different types of stresses in a structural member.  
* To apply failure theories and predict the failure of components.  
* To design bolts subjected to fatigue loads.  
* To design riveted and welded joints.  
* To design close coiled helical compression springs and shafts subjected to static and fatigue loads.  

## Course Content

### Module - 1
* Tension, compression, shear: Introduction, Internal force, stress, strain, elasticity, stress-strain diagram, working stress, stress concentration, factor of safety, bending and torsional stresses, eccentric loading, stresses due to combined axial, bending and torsional loads, principal stresses.  

### Module - 2
* Machine design, steps in the design process, standards and codes, preferred sizes, tolerances, allowances, fits, selection of materials.  
* Theories of elastic failures- Guest’s theory, Rankine’s theory, St. Venant’s theory, Haigh’s theory, and Von Mises and Hencky Theory.  

### Module - 3
* Shock and impact loads, fatigue loading, endurance limit stress, factors affecting endurance limit, design for fatigue loading, Soderberg and Goodman criteria.  
* Threaded joints, types of threads, stresses in screw threads, bolted joints, initial tension, design of bolts for static and fatigue loading, power screws.  

### Module - 4
* Design of riveted joints- material for rivets, modes of failure, efficiency of joint, design of boiler and tank joints, structural joints.  
* Design of welded joints- AWS welding symbols, stresses in fillet and butt welds, butt joint in tension, fillet weld in tension, fillet joint under torsion, fillet weld under bending, eccentrically loaded welds.  

### Module - 5
* Springs- classification, spring materials, stresses and deflection of helical springs, axial loading, static and fatigue loading, surging, critical frequency, concentric springs, end construction.  
* Shafting- material, design considerations, causes of failure in shafts, design based on strength, rigidity, critical speed, design for static and fatigue loads, repeated loading, reversed bending.  

## References

* Bhandari V B, Design of Machine Elements, Tata McGraw-Hill Education, 2010.  
* James M Gere, Mechanics of Materials, Thomson, 2007.  
* S P Timoshenko and D H Young, Elements of Strength of Materials, East West Pvt Ltd., 2011.  
* Robert L Norton, Design of Machinery, Tata McGraw-Hill, 2005.  
* P C Sharma and D K Aggarwal, Machine Design, S K Kataria & Sons, 2007.  
