---
university: "ktu"
branch: "mechanical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 6
course_code: "met384"
course_title: "heat-transfer"
language: "english"
contributor: "@AkhilaSunesh"
---

# MET384: Heat Transfer

## Course Objectives
* To introduce the heat transfer by conduction, convection and radiation modes.  
* To provide useful information for solving the heat transfer problems across the plane and cylindrical sections.  
* To give enough ideas to solve the heat transfer problems involving convection heat transfer.  
* To determine the performance of heat exchangers.  
* Present and solve the various types of radiation heat transfer problems.  

## Course Content

### Module - 1 (Introduction to Heat Transfer)
* Modes of Heat Transfer: Introduction to Conduction, Convection, radiation.  
* Conduction: Fourier law of heat conduction.  
* Thermal conductivity of solids, liquids and gases.  
* Factors affecting thermal conductivity.  
* Most general heat conduction equation in Cartesian and cylindrical coordinates.  

### Module - 2 (Conduction Heat Transfer)
* One dimensional steady state conduction with and without heat generation.  
* Conduction through plane walls, cylinders.  
* Critical thickness of insulation.  
* Heat transfer through composite wall.  
* Extended surface heat transfer – fin performance – effect of variable thermal conductivity.  

### Module - 3 (Convection Heat Transfer)
* Convection heat transfer: Newton’s law of cooling – Free and forced convection.  
* Laminar and Turbulent flow.  
* Reynolds Number, Critical Reynolds Number, Prandtl Number, Nusselt Number, Grashoff Number and Rayleigh’s Number.  
* Elementary ideas of hydrodynamics and thermal boundary layers.  
* Thickness of Boundary layer.  
* Displacement, Momentum and Energy thickness (description only).  

### Module - 4 (Heat Exchangers)
* Heat exchangers: Classification.  
* Log mean temperature difference.  
* Overall heat transfer coefficient.  
* Fouling and scaling of heat exchangers.  
* LMTD and NTU method of performance evaluation of heat exchangers.  

### Module - 5 (Radiation Heat Transfer)
* Radiation: Fundamentals of radiation – radiation spectrum – thermal radiation.  
* Concept of black body and grey body – monochromatic and total emissive power.  
* Absorptivity, reflectivity and transmissivity.  
* Laws of radiation.  
* Radiation between two surfaces.  
* Geometrical factors for simple configuration.  
* Radiation shields.  
* Electrical network method of solving problems.  

## References
* Sachdeva R. C., Fundamentals of Engineering Heat and Mass Transfer, New Age Science Limited.  
* R. K. Rajput, Heat and*
