---
university: "ktu"
branch: "mechanical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 6
course_code: "met394"
course_title: "advanced-design-synthesis"
language: "english"
contributor: "@AkhilaSunesh"
---

# MET394: Advanced Design Synthesis

## Course Objectives

* To give an overview of the techniques used in Mechanical Engineering for the analysis and synthesis of mechanisms.  
* To familiarize the graphical and analytical techniques commonly used in the synthesis of mechanisms.  
* To provide sufficient theoretical background to understand contemporary mechanism design techniques.  
* To develop skills for applying these theories in practice. Identify mechanisms by type of motion (Planar, Spatial etc.).  
* Select the best type of mechanism for a specific application and apply the fundamental synthesis technique to properly dimension the mechanism.  

## Course Content

### Module - 1  
* Floating Link, Special methods of velocity and acceleration analysis using auxiliary points.  
* Overlay method for conditioned crank mechanisms, coupler curves.  
* Roberts–Chebyshev theorem. Inflection circle, Euler–Savery equation, Hartman construction, Bobillier construction.  

### Module - 2  
* Synthesis using optimum transmission angle.  
* Geometric methods of synthesis with three accuracy points: poles of four bar linkages, relative poles of four bar linkages, function generators, poles of slider crank mechanisms, relative poles of slider crank mechanisms, rectilinear recorder mechanisms.  
* Synthesis of slider crank mechanism with three accuracy points.  

### Module - 3  
* Geometric methods of synthesis with four accuracy points: pole triangles, center point curves, circle point curves, construction of circle points, cardinal points, opposite poles, pole quadrilaterals.  
* Function generators, synthesis of slider crank mechanism with four accuracy points.  

### Module - 4  
* Algebraic methods of synthesis using displacement equations: crank and follower synthesis – three accuracy points.  
* Crank and follower synthesis – angular velocities and accelerations.  

### Module - 5  
* Rectilinear mechanisms, algebraic methods of synthesis using complex numbers.  
* Spatial motion and spatial linkages.  
* Types of spatial mechanisms, single loop linkage and multiple loop linkages.  
* Simple mechanisms in robots.  

## References

* Richard S. Hartenberg, Jacques Denavit, *Kinematic Synthesis of Linkages*, McGraw Hill Book Company, 1964.  
* Allen S. Hall, *Kinematics and Linkage Design*, Prentice Hall of India Ltd., 1986.  
* Shigley, *Theory of Mechanisms and Machines*, McGraw Hill International Edition, 4th Edition, 2014.  
* A.R. Holowenko, *Dynamics of Machinery*, John Wiley & Sons Inc., 1955.  
