---
university: "ktu"
branch: "mechanical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 6
course_code: "met398"
course_title: "advanced-numerical-controlled-machining"
language: "english"
contributor: "@AkhilaSunesh"
---

# MET398: Advanced Numerical Controlled Machining

## Course Objectives

* To understand the concept and structure of numerical control systems and their applications.  
* To study the features and control systems of CNC machines.  
* To learn to write numerical part programs for simple machining operations.  
* To familiarize with computer-assisted part programming features.  
* To study the constructional and automated features of CNC machines.  

## Course Content

### Module - 1 (Principles of Numerical Control)
* Structure of NC systems.  
* Applications of CNC machines in manufacturing.  
* Advantages of CNC machines.  
* Historical developments and future trends.  
* Future of NC Machines.  
* Difference between ordinary and NC Machine tools.  
* Machining Capabilities of a CNC Machine.  
* Methods for improving accuracy and productivity.  

### Module - 2 (Control of NC Systems)
* Classification of CNC control systems: Open and Closed loop systems.  
* Types of CNC Machine Tools systems devices (encoders, interpolators).  
* Features of CNC Systems.  
* Direct Numerical Control (DNC).  
* Standard Controllers and general programming features in CNC Systems.  
* Computer process monitoring and control.  
* Adaptive control systems.  

### Module - 3 (NC Part Programming)
* Axis identification and coordinate systems.  
* Structure of CNC part program.  
* Programming codes.  
* Programming for 2 and 3 axis control systems.  
* Manual part programming for a turning center.  
* Programming using tool nose radius compensation.  
* Tool offsets.  
* Do loops, subroutines and fixed cycles.  
* Manual programming for simple parts.  

### Module - 4 (Computer Aided Part Programming)
* Tools for computer aided part programming.  
* Computer aided NC programming in APT language.  
* Use of canned cycles.  
* Generation of NC programs through CAD/CAM systems.  
* Design and implementation of post processors.  

### Module - 5 (Constructional Details of CNC Machines)
* Machine structure, slide–ways, motion transmission elements.  
* Swarf removal and safety considerations.  
* Automatic tool changers and multiple pallet systems.  
* Sensors and feedback devices in CNC machines.  
* Constructional details of CNC turning center and CNC machining center.  
* Tooling of CNC machines.  
* Tooling requirements of CNC machines, pre-set and qualified tools.  
* Work and tool holding devices in CNC machines.  
* Design considerations of CNC machines.  

## References

* Radhakrishnan, P., *Computer Numerical Control Machines*, New Central Book Agencies.  
* Mikell P. Groover, *Automation, Production Systems and Computer Integrated Manufacturing*, Prentice Hall.  
* Yoram Koren, *Computer Control of Manufacturing Systems*, Tata McGraw Hill, 2005.  
* HMT, *Mechatronics*, Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Company Limited, New Delhi, 1998.  
