---
country: "india"
university: "calicut-university"
branch: "computer-applications"
version: "2024"
semester: 3
course_code: "bca3cj201"
course_title: "data-structures-using-c"
language: "english"
contributor: "@aafthxb"
---

# BCA3CJ201: Data Structures using C

## Course Objectives
* This course explores implementations of linked list and array-based data structures.
* It delves into the inner workings of basic data structures including lists, stacks, queues, trees, and graphs.

## Course Outcomes
* **CO 1:** Differentiate basic data structures (arrays, linked lists, stacks, queues) based on their characteristics, operations, and real-world applications.
* **CO 2:** Perform basic operations (e.g., insertion, deletion, search) on fundamental data structures using a chosen programming language.
* **CO 3:** Identify the properties and applications of advanced data structures (trees,
graphs).
* **CO 4:**  Investigate the properties of various searching and sorting Techniques.
* **CO 5:** Demonstrate critical thinking and problem-solving skills by applying data structures and algorithms to address complex computational challenges.
* **CO 6:**  Implement and analyse different data structure algorithms (to solve practical problems).

## Course Content

### Module - 1 (Introduction to Data Structures and Basic Algorithms)
* Overview of Data Structures: Data type Vs. Data structure, ADT, Definition of Data structure, Data structure Classification – Linear, Non Linear (Array, Linked List, Stack, Queue, Tree, Graph).
* Introduction to Arrays: Definition, Types (1 Dimensional, 2 Dimensional, Multi-Dimensional, Sparse matrix), Different Array Operations with Algorithm (insertion, deletion, traversal).
* Structures and Self-referential structures.
* Introduction to Linked list: Definition, Types (Single linked list, Doublelinked list, Circular linked list- concept only).
* Singly Linked List Operations with Algorithm (insertion, deletion, traversal).

### Module - 2 (Stack and Queue)
* Introduction to Stack: Definition, stack operations with Algorithm, Applications: recursion, infix to postfix - example and Algorithm.
* Implementation of Stack: using array (overflow & underflow) and Linkedlist (with algorithm).
* Introduction to Queue: Definition, queue operations with Algorithm, Types: Double ended queue (Input Restricted and Output restricted), Circularqueue, Applications.
* Implementation of Queue: using array and Linked list (with algorithm).

### Module - 3 (Non- Linear Data Structures)
* Introduction to Trees: Basic terminology, Types (Binary treecomplete,full, skewed etc., Expression Tree).
* Properties of Binary tree, Applications. 
* Binary tree representations- using array and linked list.
* Operations on Binary tree- Insertion, Deletion, Traversal- inorder, preorder, postorder - (concepts with examples).
* Algorithm of non-recursive Binary tree traversal.
* Introduction to Graph: Definition, Basic terminology, Types (Directed, Undirected, Weighted).
* Graph representation – Adjacency list and Adjacency Matrix, Applications.

### Module - 4 (Sorting and Searching)
* Introduction to Sorting: Definition, Classification (Internal, External).
* Internal Sorting Algorithms: Selection sort- Selection sort algorithm, Exchange sort- Bubble sort algorithm.
* External Sorting Algorithms: Merge sort- Demonstrate with example (NoAlgorithm needed).
* Advanced sorting Algorithm-: Quick sort- Demonstrate with example (NoAlgorithm needed).
* Introduction to Searching: Linear search and Binary search (Algorithm needed) with example.
* Hashing: Hash Tables, Hash Functions, Different Hash Functions – Division method, Multiplication method, Mid square method, Folding Method, Collision and Collision resolution Techniques: Open hashing-Chaining, Closed hashing-Probing.

### Module - 5 (Hands-on Programming in Data Structures: Practical Applications, Case Study and Course Project)
This module involves implementing the following :-
* Basic Operations in a single linked list (Menu driven).
* Sort the elements in given singly linked list.
* Stack using array.
* Stack using Linked list.
* Queue using Array.
* Queue using Linked list.
* Sorting algorithms- Selection, Bubble Sort.
* Searching Algorithms- Linear and Binary search.
* A Project/ Case study.

## References
### Textbooks 
1. Seymour Lipschutz, “Data Structures with C”, McGraw Hill Education (Schaum's Outline Series).
2. Reema Thareja, “Data Structures Using C”, Oxford University Press.