---
country: "india"
university: "calicut-university"
branch: "computer-applications"
version: "2024"
semester: 3
course_code: "bca3cj203"
course_title: "introduction-to-data-science"
language: "english"
contributor: "@aafthxb"
---

# BCA3CJ203: Introduction to Data Science

## Course Objectives
* This course covers the domain of data science, which deals with large volumes of data. 
* You'll learn to use modern tools and techniques to find unseen patterns, derive meaningful information, and make business decisions.

## Course Outcomes
* **CO 1:** Identify the relevance and applications of computers in other disciplines with various data science applications.
* **CO 2:** Understand data science concepts and be capable of applying data science skills and interpreting data science results.
* **CO 3:** Acquire logical thinking about the evolution of data science.
* **CO 4:**  Know how to use tools for acquiring, cleaning, analyzing, exploring, and visualizing data.
* **CO 5:** Learn to make data-driven inferences and decisions.
* **CO 6:** Be able to perform data science processing, such as data import, data analysis, data visualization, and data modeling.

## Course Content

### Module - 1 (Introduction to Data Science)
* Introduction to Data Science-Definition.
* Evolution of Data Science.
* Data Science Role. 
* Application of data sciences.

### Module - 2 (Data Collection and Data Pre-Processing)
* Data Collection Strategies.
* Data Pre-Processing Overview.
* Data Cleaning.
* Data Integration and Transformation.
* Data Reduction and Discretization.

### Module - 3 (Data Analytics)
* Descriptive Statistics.
* Mean, Standard Deviation.
* Skewness and Kurtosis.
* Box Plots.
* Pivot Table.
* Correlation Statistics.

### Module - 4 (Data Model Development and Evaluation)
* Simple and Multiple Regression.
* Model Evaluation using Visualization.
* Residual plot and distributional plot.
* Prediction and Decision Making.
* Model Evaluation techniques.
* Supervised learning techniques.
* Unsupervised learning techniques.

### Module - 5 (Open-Ended Module - Application Level)
This module covers topics such as:
* Out of samples evaluation metrics.
* Cross-validation in Model evaluation.
* Overfitting and underfitting concepts.
* Appropriate model selection.
* Prediction and decision-making concepts.
* Prediction by ridge regression.

## References
### Textbooks 
1. Jojo Moolayil, "Smarter Decisions: The Intersection of IoT and Data Science", PACKT, 2016.
2. Cathy O'Neil and Rachel Schutt, "Doing Data Science", O'Reilly, 2015.
3. David Dietrich, Barry Heller, Beibei Yang, "Data Science and Big data Analytics", EMC 2013.
4. Igual, L; Seghi', S., "Introduction to Data Science a Python approach to concepts, Techniques and Applications", Springer, ISBN:978-3-319-50016-4.
5. David Taieb, "Data Analysis with Python A Modern Approach", Packt Publishing, ISBN-9781789950069.