---
country: "india"
university: "calicut-university"
branch: "computer-applications"
version: "2024"
semester: 3
course_code: "bca3cj204"
course_title: "foundations-of-artificial-intelligence"
language: "english"
contributor: "@aafthxb"
---

# BCA3CJ204: Foundations of Artificial Intelligence

## Course Objectives
* Provide an introduction to the field of Artificial Intelligence.
* Cover fundamental concepts, problem-solving methods such as search algorithms and heuristic approaches, and different knowledge representation techniques.
* Address the ethical dimensions of AI and their societal impacts.

## Course Outcomes
* **CO 1:** Able to gain insight into the evolution of key ideas and technologies by exploring the Artificial Intelligence history and its foundational concepts.
* **CO 2:** Able to acquire knowledge and skills to understand, design, implement intelligent agents to perceive, reason and act within their environments.
* **CO 3:** Proficiency in various uninformed and informed search strategies along with constraint satisfaction problem solving methods.
* **CO 4:** Ability to design and implement logical agents and construct ontologies that capture the semantics of a domain, facilitating knowledge representation.
* **CO 5:** Understand the ethical considerations of AI and their societal impacts and gain insights into the future trajectory of Al by analysing the emerging trends.
* **CO 6:** Represent various AI problems using algorithmic approaches and enhance problem-solving skills by visualizing solutions through the utilization of software tools.

## Course Content

### Module - 1 (Introduction to AI)
* Artificial Intelligence: Definition and Applications.
* Foundations of Artificial Intelligence.
* History of Artificial Intelligence, State of the Art.
* Intelligent Agents: Agents and Environments.
* The Concept of Rationality, Nature of Environments: Specifying the Task Environment, Properties of Task Environment.
* Structure of Agents: Agent Programs, Simple Reflex Agent, Model Based Reflex Agent, Goal Based Agent, Utility Based Agent, Learning Agent (Concept Only, No Algorithm required).

### Module - 2 (AI Problem Solving)
* Problem Solving Agents (Concept Only), Examples Problems: Toy problems, Real world problems.
* Solutions for searching: Tree Search and Graph Search and Measuring Problem Solving Performance (Concept Only).
* Uninformed Search Strategies: Breadth First Search, Uniform Cost Search, Depth First Search.
* Informed search strategies: Greedy Best First search, A* Search, Heuristic Search (Concept Only).
* Constrain Satisfaction Problems: Definition, Examples: Map colouring, Job-Shop scheduling.
* Constraint Propagation: Node Consistency, Arc Consistency, Path Consistency and K-Consistency.

### Module - 3 (Knowledge Representation)
* Logical agents: Knowledge based agents, The Wumpus world.
* Logic: Definition, Propositional logic, Syntax and Semantics, Simple Knowledge Base.
* First Order Logic: Definition, Syntax and Semantic (Models, Symbols and Interpretations, Terms, Atomic Sentences, Complex Sentences, Quantifiers, Equality).
* Ontological Engineering: Definition.
* Categories and Objects: Physical Composition, Measurements, Objects: Things and Stuff, Process, Time Intervals, Fluent and Objects.
* Quantifying Uncertainty (Concept Only).

### Module - 4 (AI: Philosophical Foundations and Future)
* Weak AI: Can machines act intelligently?.
* Strong AI: Can machines really think?.
* Ethics and risks of developing Artificial Intelligence.
* Agent components and architectures.
* Are we going in the right direction? What if AI succeed?.

### Module - 5 (Open-Ended Module - Application Level)
This module involves discussion on topics from the following areas:
* Discuss on evolution of AI.
* Analyzing different agent types and environments.
* Building a simple Reflex Agent.
* Identifying Problem-Solving agents in everyday applications.
* Implementation of Tree Search.
* Algorithmic implementation of A* Search and Heuristic Search.
* Discussion on the effectiveness of heuristic methods.
* Real-world applications of CSP.
* Building a knowledge-based agent for the Wumpus World.
* Discussion on uncertainty in AI.
* A Case Study: Provide students with case studies or examples of Al applications in different domains (e.g., healthcare, finance, marketing).

## References
### Textbooks 
1. Stuart Russell, Peter Norvig, "Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach", 3rd Edition, Prentice Hall, 2010.
2. Deepak Khemani, "A First Course in Artificial Intelligence", McGraw Hill Education, 2017.
3. Elaine Rich, Kevin Knight, & Shivashankar B Nair, "Artificial Intelligence", McGraw Hill, 3rd Edition, 2009.