---
country: "india"
university: "calicut-university"
branch: "computer-applications"
version: "2024"
semester: 3
course_code: "bca3fs113"
course_title: "website-designing-using-content-management-system"
language: "english"
contributor: "@aafthxb"
---

# BCA3FS113: Website Designing using Content Management System

## Course Objectives
The course covers fundamental web design concepts including HTML and CMS principles, focusing on Drupal as a robust Content Management System. Students will learn to create and customize websites using Drupal, exploring its features such as content types, themes, and modules to build dynamic and interactive web pages.

## Course Outcomes
* **CO1:** Cultivate a robust understanding of web design fundamentals, laying a strong foundation for their journey into the dynamic world of digital design and development.
* **CO2:** Attain comprehensive knowledge and practical proficiency in Content Management Systems (CMS), empowering to navigate and excel in the ever-evolving landscape of digital content creation and management.
* **CO3:** Develop expertise in Drupal, a widely used CMS platform, gaining comprehensive understanding of its features, configuration, and installation processes, thus preparing them for proficient and innovative web development endeavors.
* **CO4:** Impart a comprehensive understanding of website development using Drupal and facilitate the acquisition of expertise across various options within the Drupal ecosystem.
* **CO5:** Gain an understanding of how to apply web design concepts to real-world scenarios, effectively designing and developing functional and aesthetically pleasing websites utilizing the Drupal CMS.
* **CO6:** Develop proficiency in advanced website management skills, including installing and configuring modules, managing menus, and more, to effectively navigate and optimize the functionality of websites built on the Drupal platform.

## Course Content

### Module - 1 (Introduction to Web Designing)
* Basics of Web Designing -World Wide Web (WWW), W3C, Web Browser.
* Web Server, Web Hosting, Web Pages, DNS, URL.
* Overview of HTML (Concept only) and its role in Web Development.
* Open-Source S/W, Open-Source vs Closed Source Software, Open Source Licenses (Concept only).

### Module - 2 (Introduction to CMS)
* Introduction to Content Management Systems (CMS) - Features of CMS.
* Web Content Management System.
* Components of Content Management System.

### Module - 3 (Introduction to Drupal)
* Drupal - Features, Advantages and Disadvantages, Installation and Configuration.
* Content types and Field.
* Drupal Architecture.
* User Management, Managing Comments.
* Creating and Customizing Themes.

### Module - 4 (Building Website)
* Website Development - Working with Templates and Template files.
* Articles, Creating Web Forms.
* Managing blocks, Add Links to Blocks, Moving Elements within Block.
* Blocks and Regions.
* Creating and Customizing Views, Installing and Configuring Modules.
* Static Pages, Creating Pages, Menu Management.

### Module - 5 (Practical)
* Install and configure Drupal on your computer.
* Design a website of your college using Drupal and modify the basic site settings.
* Add different menus to your website. The menus should contain: home, news, gallery, about us and contact us.
* Create user roles for your site and assign permissions.
* Install and activate a new theme from the Drupal theme repository.
* Add different blocks in to your website.
* Create a new content type and add some fields to it.
* Add new article to your site.
* Install and configure the 'pathauto' module.
* Create the mobile view of your website.

## References
### Textbooks
1. Jennifer Campbell, Jennifer T Campbell, Web Design: Introductory, Course Technology.
2. Jason Beaird and Alex Walker, The Principles of Beautiful Web Design, SitePoint.
3. Bob Boiko, Content Management Bible, Wiley.
4. Daniel Sipos, Drupal 9 Module Development, Packt Publishing Limited.