---
country: "india"
university: "cusat"
branch: "msc-environmental-science-and-technology"
version: "2024"
semester: 3
course_code: "24-360-0302"
course_title: "biodiversity-and-conservation"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# 24-360-0302: BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION

## Course Objectives
* To understand the fundamental concepts and types of biodiversity and to evaluate the economic
and philosophical values of biodiversity. To analyze the role and effectiveness of conservation
strategies and techniques and to identify and assess the major threats to biodiversity at local
and global scales. To examine the biodiversity of India and its conservation policies and laws.

## Course Outcomes
* **CO 1:** Ability to define and classify different aspects of biodiversity.
* **CO 2:** Capacity to critically evaluate the economic and philosophical dimensions of biodiversity.
* **CO 3:** Proficiency in designing and implementing conservation strategies.
* **CO 4:** Competence in analyzing and addressing threats to biodiversity.
* **CO 5:** Understanding of India’s biodiversity richness and conservation efforts,
with insights into future directions.

## Course Content

### Module 1: (Introduction to Biodiversity)
* Definition and Basic concepts of biodiversity
* Types and importance of biodiversity
* Species diversity
* Measuring species diversity
* Genetic diversity
* Ecosystem diversity: 
  - Ecosystems
    + Structure and functions 
    + Types of ecosystems
    + Ecosystem services
    + Energy flow in ecosystems
    + Energy flow models
    + Species interactions
    + Food chains and food webs
* Keystone species
* Biodiversity Worldwide

### Module 2: (The Value of Biodiversity)
* Ecological and environmental economics
* Cost-benefit analysis
* Values of biodiversity:
  - Direct use value
  - Indirect use value
  - Non-use value
  - Option value
  - Existence value
  - Intrinsic values
  - Ethical values of biodiversity
  - Amenity values
* Economic valuation measures: 
  - Market-based valuation
  - Non-market based valuation
* Deep Ecology

### Module 3: (Conservation of Biodiversity)
* Definition and basic concepts
* Role and importance of protected areas
* Population dynamics, extinction rates and habitat loss 
* Protected areas and conservation reserves:
  - Species based conservation
  - Ecosystem based conservation
  - Community based conservation
* Bioprospecting
* Threatened species in India
* Biodiversity hotspots
* Techniques of conservation:
  - In situ conservation
  - Ex situ conservation
  - In vitro conservation
* International conservation agreements and treaties
* Restoration ecology
* Sustainable development: 
  - Definition
  - Principle 
  - Goals
* International/National policies and conservation strategies:
  - Role of MAB
* IUCN 
* Intellectual property rights:
  - TRIPS
  - CBD
  - CITES role of Indigenous knowledge systems (IKS)

### Module 4: (Threats to Biodiversity)
* Biodiversity loss:
  - Principle and impacts on ecosystem
  - Habitat loss and fragmentation
    + Edge effects
  - Invasive species: 
    + Definition and characteristics
    + Examples
    + GMOs and conservation
* Overexploitation: 
  - Case studies
* Environmental pollution and degradation 
* Global climate change
* Human population growth and impact
* Legal protection of species
* Managing protected areas
* Endangered and threatened flora and fauna of India

### Module 5: (Biodiversity of India)
* Biodiversity hotspots and endemic species in India
* Distribution of species
* Importance of wetlands in India, Faunal and floral diversity, 
* Protected areas:
  - Biosphere reserves
  - National parks
  - Wild life sanctuaries
* Sacred groves in India
* Biodiversity conservation policies and laws in India: 
  - The wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972
  - The National Forest policy 1988, 
  - The Biological Diversity Act 2002. 
  - National Biodiversity Action Plan 
* Emerging Trends and Future Directions
* Biodiversity Worldwide

## References
1. Gaston, Kevin J., and John I. Spicer. Biodiversity: an introduction. John Wiley & Sons, 2013.
2. Van Dyke, Fred. Conservation biology: foundations, concepts, applications. Springer Science & Business Media, 2008.
3. Goldstein, Eli. Introduction to Environmental Economics: By Nick Hanley, Jason F. Shogren and Ben White Oxford University Press, 2001.
4. Sessions, George. Deep ecology for the twenty-first century. (1995).
5. Leelakrishnan, P. Environmental law in India, (2008).
6. Williams, Claire G. Introduction to Conservation Genetics- Cambridge University Press, 2002.
7. Newman, Jonathan A. Climate change biology. Cabi, 2011.