---
country: "india"
university: "cusat"
branch: "msc-environmental-science-and-technology"
semester: "3"
course_code: "24-360-0303"
course_title: "chemistry-of-water-and-wastewater-treatment"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
version: "2024"
---

# 24-360-0303: 
  - (CHEMISTRY OF WATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT

## Course Objectives

* Identification and assessment of water quality, interpretation of data, optimization of treatment procedures, reactor operation and modelling procedures, testing and evaluation of materials used in water process technology. Incite interest among the students for capacity building for novelty and innovations in the existing treatment systems they are exposed in their future professional field based on a strong foundation of environmental, analytical and applied chemistry for meeting the need of the public, industry and government statutory organizations.
* Students are trained and made competent to identify problems from industry and outside, originate project proposals with specific objectives, design of research study/consultancy, generation of pertinent results by standard analytical methods, interpretation of results, evaluation of the problem findings with statutory guidelines, creative ideas, start-ups in water segments, product development and entrepreneurship.

## Course Outcomes
* **CO 1:** Understand basics of water and wastewater chemistry, role of a hydroanalytical chemist, testing and analysis protocols and classification methods.
* **CO 2:** Water quality data analysis and interpretations for fixing the quality issues of the water treatment process industry with respect to source, process and product water.
* **CO 3:** Decision of the required treatment for solving the problem based the evaluation of the quality parameters and profile based on hydro geochemical perspective using the engineering principles.
* **CO 4:** Testing and evaluation of water based on hydro analytical data and materials for tertiary treatment using principles of adsorption engineering and isotherm models.
* **CO 5:** Additional higher level of deliberation of the technicality of hydro analytical issues of water processing industries through practices to come out with creating suggestions can be reported as publications in standard journals and documents to statutory organizations, industry, courts and governments.

## Course Content
### Module 1: 
* World water crisis
* Sustainable development goals
* World Water Development Reports (2024, 2025, & 2026) and problems addressed
* Water Resources of India report:
  Dynamic Groundwater Resources of India, 2022
  Safe Drinking water Regulation
* Classification of water based on origin
* Designated Best Use (DBU) based classifications
* Analytical instrumentations and testing protocols for groundwater:
  Drinking water and wastewater using TOC Analyser, AAS, HPLC, ICP-MS for determinations
* Water Quality Data:
  Interpretations and report writing as per CPCB, BIS & WHO standards
* Water quality monitoring programs:
  Reported case studies
* River & Lake monitoring protocols and modeling procedures
* Soil column compartments

# ## Module 2:
  ((Water Quality Parameters & Water Quality Indices)
* Historical development of Water and wastewater analysis
* US- EPA Regulations
* APHA Standards
* Water Quality Guidelines:
  Evolution as part of sanitary engineering
* Classification of analysis
* Parameters
* TS and DS distribution
* DO, COD fractions
* Concept and tests
* Fractions of N, P, TOC, DOC, BDOC and NBDOC
* Rationale in setting aesthetic and toxicity criteria
* Water Quality index and sample calculations:
  Water quality analysis
  Data profile and interpretation
  Water quality indices (WQI)
  Sample calculations based on published data
* Statistical methods for stratum based analysis of field samples:
  Wastewater, surface water and groundwater
* Analysis and interpretation of WQ parameters for drinking water, sewage water, effluents
* Fisheries and aquaculture
* Documentation & certification (practical training in water quality laboratory)

# ## Module 3:
  ((Water Type, Classification and Hydrogeochemistry)
* Aquatic ecosystem
* DO uptake and saturation problems:
  Oxygen transfer by reaeration
  Analysis of DO sag
  DO sag models and kinetics
* Groundwater classification analyses:
  Hardness types
  Salinity
* SAR
* Ion-exchange
* Reverse ion exchange
* Hill –Piper – Trilinear plots
* Durov Diagram
* Schoeller Diagram
* BIS and WHO standards of drinking water
* Analysis and finding solutions for quality improvement using field samples:
  Dugwells, borewells, industries and public
* Analysis and interpretation of water for irrigation indices:
  SAR, Na %, MAR (magnesium hazard)
  Kelly’s ratio
  Permeability index
  USSL & Wilcox Diagrams and its interpretations

# ## Module 4:
  ((Chemistry of Water Stabilization and Tertiary Treatments)
* Industrial suit abilities based on indices an overview
* pE- pH diagrams and their applications
* Electrochemical aspects of corrosion:
  Immunity
  Passivation and protection
  Corrosion chemistry of Fe, Cu, Pb and Zn
* Aggressive Index
* Langelier Saturation Index
* Ryznar stability index
* Caldwell - Lawrence Diagram:
  Application
* Analysis of wastewater and effluent water of selected industries
* Tertiary treatment techniques:
  Adsorption methods
* Isotherm models and kinetics
* Model adsorption reactor systems and optimizations
* Determination of model parameters
* Freundlich, Langmuir, BET, D-R, John, John- Sivanandan Achari isotherms
* Determination of porosity and surface area of porous materials used in tertiary treatment reactor systems

# ## Module 5:
  ((Chemistry of Corrosion, Heavy Metal Removal in Processing Industries & Health Risk Assessment)
* Electrochemical aspects of corrosion coupon test and electrochemical evaluation of corrosivity
* Corrosion inhibition:
  Chemical inhibitors
  Sacrificial anodes
  Impressed current techniques
* Redox techniques:
  Removal of iron, manganese and chromate
* Removal of fluoride and phosphate
* Treatment
* Monitoring and process optimisation
* Reporting
* Preparation of proposals and documentation
* Case studies
* Assessment of Human Health and Cancer Risk based on heavy metal presence in water
* Design of research study/consultancy
* Generation of pertinent results by standard analytical methods
* Interpretation of results
* Identification of water utility based industrial problem:
  Evaluation of the process status
  Cause findings with statutory guidelines
  Report writing
* Innovative - creative ideas:
  Start-ups in water segments
  Product development and entrepreneurship

## References

1. Chin, D. A.; (2000). —Water Resources Engineering‖. ISBN 0-201-35091-2, Prentice- Hall, New Jersey.
2. Tebbutt, T. H. Y.; (2004). —Priciples of water quality control‖. 6th Edition, ISBN 0 7506 36580, Buttorworth- Heinemann.
3. Metcaff and Eddy (2003). Waste Water Engineering, Fourth Edition, Tata McGraw-Hill, New Delhi.
4. W. W. Eckenfelder, Jr. (1980). Principles of Water Quality Management, CBN Publishing Co Boston.
5. A. W. Hounslow (1995). Water Quality Data –Analysis and interpretation, Lewis Publishers, Boca Raton.
6. APHA (2012). Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Waste water 2 st Centennial Edition, American Public Health Association, Washington DC.
7. Samuel D. Faust (2010). Chemistry of water treatment, 2 nd Edition, CRC Press, Tylor and Francis
Group, New York.
8. AWWA (2010).Water Quality- Principle and practices of water supply operation series, Vol.4 Edition, American water works association, Denver.
9. APHA (2022) , Standard Methods For the Examination of Water and Wastewater, 24th, Edition, American Public Health Association, ISBN: 978-0-87553-299-8.
10. Krishna B and Achari V. S ( 2024) Groundwater for drinking and industrial purposes: A study of water stability and human health risk assessment from black sand mineral rich coastal region of Kerala, India, Journal of Environmental Management 351 (2024) 119783, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2023.119783.
11. Krishna, B., & Achari, V. S. (2023). Groundwater chemistry and entropy weighted water quality index of tsunami affected and ecologically sensitive coastal region of India. Heliyon, 9(10).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e20431.
12. Achari, V. S., Lopez, R. M., Rajalakshmi, A. S., Jayasree, S., Shibin, O. M., John, D., & Sekkar, V. (2021). Microporous carbon with highly dispersed nano-lanthanum oxide (La2O3) for enhanced adsorption of methylene blue. Separation and Purification Technology, 279, 119626.
13. Achari, V.S. (2005). Water Quality Assessment in the Tsunami Affected Coastal Areas of Kerala, 2005. The final report submitted to Department of Science and Technology. DST Project No. SR/S4/Es-135-7.7/2005 dated 03-03-2005.
14. Achari V S, Report of the healthiness study of secured landfill (SLF) at Travancore- Cochin Chemicals Limited, Udyogamandal, Kochi, Kerala, Final Report, June 2021.
15. Achari V S, Scientific Study related Health & Safety of Residents Near BPCL-Kochi Refinery, Kerala, India- Study Report Submitted by Expert Committee, 15 February, 2021.
