---
country: "india"
university: "calicut-university"
branch: "computer-applications"
version: "2024"
semester: 2
course_code: "bca2cj102"
course_title: "statistical-foundation-for-computer-applications"
language: "english"
contributor: "@aafthxb"
---

# BCA2CJ102: Statistical Foundation for Computer Applications

## Course Objectives
The course on probability and statistics covers fundamental topics including descriptive statistics (measures of central tendency and dispersion), probability theory (events, sample spaces, probability laws, random variables, and distributions), inferential statistics (regression analysis), and applications in various fields such as science, engineering, economics, and social sciences, emphasizing critical thinking, data analysis, and problem-solving skills.

## Course Outcomes
* **CO1:** Apply fundamental statistics concepts
* **CO2:** Analyze data using descriptive statistics
* **CO3:** Perform regression analysis
* **CO4:** Apply probability and statistics in real-world situations
* **CO5:** Develop critical thinking and problem-solving skills
* **CO6:** Communicate statistical findings effectively

## Course Content

### Module 1: Descriptive Statistics
* Concept of primary and secondary data, Methods of collection.
* Measures of central tendencies (Mean, Median, Mode, HM, GM).
* Measures of dispersion, Relative Measures and Absolute Measures.
* Range, Quartile deviation, Mean deviation, standard deviation, Variance.

### Module 2: Statistical Inference and Regression Analysis
* Principles of Least Squares and Fitting of Straight Line.
* Point estimation: maximum likelihood estimation (MLE), method of moments. Confidence intervals for population parameters.
* Pearson’s Coefficient of Correlation and Rank Correlation.
* Simple linear regression and multiple linear regression. Logistic regression for classification problems.

### Module 3: Probability Theory
* Random experiment, Sample point, Sample Space.
* Events, Operation of events (Union, Intersection, Complement of Events).
* Exclusive and exhaustive events, equally likely events with examples.
* Classical approach to probability, Axiomatic definitions of probability, Simple problems.
* Theorems of probability - Addition Theorem, Multiplication Theorem.
* Conditional probability.
* Inverse probability.
* Baye’s Theorem.

### Module 4: ADVANCED PROBABILITY DISTRIBUTION
* Discrete and continuous random variables and probability distribution.
* Binomial distribution: Definition, Expectation, Variance, Moment Generating Function and Problems.
* Poisson distribution: Definition, Expectation, Variance, Moment Generating Function and Problems.
* Normal distribution: Definition, Expectation, Variance, Moment Generating Function, Standard normal curve and Problems.
* Testing of Hypothesis: General principles of testing, Two types of errors.
* Type of Testing: T-Test, ANOVA-Test, Chi-square test (Concept Only).

### Module 5: Open Ended module- Application Level
Discuss topics from the following:
* Reliability and Validity of Different Data Sources.
* Highlighting the use of Measures Mean, Median and Mode in Real-World Scenarios.
* Significance of Measures of Dispersion in Data Analysis.
* Interpretation of EDA plots.
* Importance of Correlation and Regression in numerous Computer fields.
* Problem sets involving real-world applications of probability theorems.
* Central Limit Theorem.
* Real-world scenario of Binomial, Poisson and Normal Distribution.
* Difference between of Binomial, Poisson and Normal Distribution.
* Advanced Concept of T-Test, ANOVA-Test, Chi-square test, Z-Test.
* Markov-Chain-Monte-Carlo Method and it's use.
* Case Study

## References
1. Introduction to Mathematical Statistics, Hogg R V Craig A T, Macmillan
2. Mathematical Statistics, Freund J E, Waple R E, Prentice Hall of India.
3. Probability and Statistics for Engineers, Miller I Freund J E, Prentice Hall of India.
4. Statistics for Management, Levin R I, Prentice Hall of India
5. Gupta, S.P. Statistical Methods. Sultan Chand and Sons: New Delhi.
6. Mood, A.M., Graybill, F.A and Boes, D.C. Introduction to Theory of Statistics. 3rd Edition Paperback – International Edition.
7. Mukhopadhyay, P. Mathematical Statistics. New central Book Agency (P) Ltd: Calcutta
8. Probability and Statistics for Computer Scientists by Michael Baron