---
country: "india"
university: "calicut-university"
branch: "computer-applications"
version: "2024"
semester: 2
course_code: "bca2cj103"
course_title: "numerical-analysis-and-operations-research"
language: "english"
contributor: "@aafthxb"
---

# BCA2CJ103: Numerical Analysis and Operations Research

## Course Objectives
This course covers foundational concepts in numerical methods and operations research, emphasizing error analysis and solution techniques for algebraic and transcendental equations. Students will develop skills in polynomial interpolation, numerical integration, and explore fundamental principles of operations research, including linear programming.

## Course Outcomes
* **CO1:** Develop a solid foundation in numerical methods, acquiring the skills to analyze and solve algebraic and transcendental equations, and gaining a practical understanding of the sources and management of errors in numerical computations.
* **CO2:** Cultivate both a comprehensive grasp and practical proficiency in polynomial interpolation techniques, alongside acquiring expertise in numerical methods for the solution of definite integrals.
* **CO3:** Establish a robust groundwork in Operations Research, nurturing a discerning capability to critically evaluate its applications across diverse problem-solving scenarios.
* **CO4:** Develop expertise in Linear Programming, mastering the art of employing sophisticated optimization techniques for the effective resolution of Linear Programming problems.
* **CO5:** Impart a comprehensive understanding of transportation problems and cultivate an appreciation for the methods used in finding basic feasible solutions.
* **CO6:** Develop proficiency in addressing assignment problems and employ the method to attain optimal solutions, providing a holistic skill set for logistical optimization.

## Course Content

### Module 1: Numerical Analysis I
* Errors in numerical calculations - Sources of errors.
* Solution of Algebraic and Transcendental Equations - Bisection method.
* Method of false position.
* Newton Raphson method.

### Module 2: Numerical Analysis II
* Polynomial Interpolation - Lagrange interpolation.
* Newton’s forward and backward difference interpolation.
* Numerical Solution of Definite Integral - Simpson’s 1/3rd rule.
* Simpson’s 3/8 rule.
* Trapezoidal rule.

### Module 3: Operations Research I
* Introduction to Operations Research – Definition, Advantages and Limitations of Operations Research.
* Linear Programming Problem – Definition, Formulation of LPP, Feasible solution and Optimal solution.
* Dual of LPP.
* Graphical solution of LPP.
* Simplex Method.
* Big-M method.

### Module 4: Operations Research II
* Transportation Problem – Definition, Balanced and unbalanced Transportation problems.
* Finding basic feasible solutions – Northwest corner method.
* Least cost method.
* Vogel’s approximation method.
* Optimized (MODI) method.
* Assignment model - Definition, Balanced and unbalanced Assignment problems.
* Hungarian method for optimal solution.

### Module 5: Open Ended Module – Other Numerical Methods
* Any other two methods to solve Algebraic and Transcendental Equations.
* Any other two methods for Polynomial Interpolation.
* Any other two methods to solve Solution of Definite Integral.
* Any other method to solve LPP.

## References
### Textbooks
1. Sastry S.S., Introductory Methods of Numerical Analysis, Prentice Hall India.
2. E. Carl Froberg and Erik Carl Froberg, Introduction to Numerical Analysis, Addition Wesley.
3. Hamdy A. Taha, Operations Research an Introduction, Pearson Education Limited.
4. P. Sankara Iyer, Operations Research, Tata McGraw-Hill, 2008.