---
country: "india"
university: "calicut-university"
branch: "computer-applications"
version: "2024"
semester: 2
course_code: "bca2fs112"
course_title: "data-analysis-using-spread-sheet"
language: "english"
contributor: "@aafthxb"
---

# BCA2FS112: Data Analysis using Spread Sheet

## Course Objectives
After completing the course, students have a solid foundation in data analysis using spreadsheets, empowering them to analyze data with confidence, derive meaningful insights, and communicate their findings effectively to stakeholders.

## Course Outcomes
* **CO1:** Students will demonstrate proficiency in managing spreadsheets, including creating, formatting, and manipulating data within workbooks. They will be able to effectively navigate the spreadsheet interface and utilize toolbars.
* **CO2:** Learners will understand the importance of data organization and cleansing in spreadsheets. They will be able to import, export, filter, sort, validate, and remove duplicates from datasets. Students will develop skills to ensure data integrity and consistency, enhancing their ability to work with clean and organized datasets.
* **CO3:** Participants will acquire advanced data analysis skills like pivot tables, what-if analysis, and goal seek. They will be able to apply various spreadsheet functions and tools to perform complex calculations, analyze trends, and make informed decisions based on data analysis.
* **CO4:** Students will gain proficiency in data visualization techniques using spreadsheets. They will be able to create a variety of charts, design pivot charts, and dashboards for effective data analysis.
* **CO5:** Learners will be able to implement form controls for interactive data manipulation in their visualizations, enhancing their ability to present and explore data dynamically.
* **CO6:** Learners will develop skills in advanced features of spreadsheets such as macros, protecting data sheets and workbooks, utilizing split, freeze, and hide options effectively. They will also learn to incorporate add-ins for extended functionalities and manage printing options for the professional presentation of data.

## Course Content

### Module 1: Introduction to Spreadsheet
* Overview of spreadsheet software (e.g., Microsoft Excel, Google Sheets), Basic spreadsheet navigation and interface.
* Entering and formatting data, Data types and cell formatting, Sorting and filtering data.
* Arithmetic operations and basic formulas, Common functions (SUM, AVERAGE, MIN, MAX, COUNT).
* Text functions (CONCATENATE, LEFT, RIGHT, MID, TEXT), Date and time functions.

### Module 2: Data Cleaning and Visualization
* Logical functions (IF, AND, OR, NOT, IFERROR, IFS, SWITCH), Lookup and reference functions (VLOOKUP, HLOOKUP, INDEX, MATCH).
* Financial functions (NPV, IRR, PMT), Array formulas (SUMPRODUCT, SUMIF, AVERAGE, TRANSPOSE, Array Multiplication, FILTER, IMPORTRANGE).
* Handling missing values and duplicates, Data transformation techniques (text to columns, merging cells).
* Using advanced text functions for data cleaning, Data validation rules and error-checking.
* Creating and customizing charts (bar, line, pie, scatter, Histogram), Conditional formatting for data visualization.

### Module 3: Pivot Tables and Pivot Charts
* Sparklines and data bars, Advanced chart techniques (combination charts, dual-axis charts).
* Creating and configuring pivot tables, Grouping and summarizing data in pivot tables.
* Creating and customizing pivot charts.
* Using slicers and timeline for interactive analysis.

### Module 4: Data Analysis Technique
* Descriptive statistics (mean, median, mode, standard deviation).
* Correlation and regression analysis with example, Data analysis tools (Solver, Analysis ToolPak).
* Scenario analysis and what-if analysis (Goal Seek, Data Tables, Scenario Manager).
* Introduction to DAX (Data Analysis Expressions) for complex calculations (Concept Only).

### Module 5: Practical Applications
1. Implement filter and sort operations.
2. Perform basic Arithmetic operations (Sum, Difference, Product, Divides).
3. Using a dataset of student grades in different subjects, calculate the average grade, highest grade (MAX), lowest grade (MIN), and the total number of grades recorded (COUNT).
4. Create a spreadsheet with a list of full names in one column. Use text functions to separate the first names and last names into two new columns.
5. Create a spreadsheet with a list of dates of birth and names. Using the appropriate date and time functions, calculate each person's current age.
6. Perform Logical function on a given dataset.
7. Using a dataset of students' information, create a bar chart to visualize the data. Customize the chart with titles, axis labels, and different colours for each bar.
8. A list of 15 students with their hours of study per week and their corresponding exam scores, Use the CORREL function to Calculate the correlation coefficient.
9. Perform a simple linear regression to determine the relationship between advertising spend and sales.
10. Implement any one real life example.

## References
### Textbooks
1. Alexander, M., Kusleika, R., & Walkenbach, J. (2018). Excel 2019 Bible. Wiley.
2. Winston, W. (2019). Microsoft Excel Data Analysis and Business Modeling. Microsoft Press.
3. Nigam, M. (2021). Data Analysis with Excel: Tips and Techniques. BPB Publications.
4. Alexander, M., & Kusleika, D. (2018). Excel 2019 Power Programming with VBA. Wiley.
5. McFedries, P. (2019). Excel Pivot Tables and Pivot Charts: Your visual blueprint for creating dynamic spreadsheets. Visual.