---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "mca"
version: "2019"
semester: 1
course_code: "RLMCA103"
course_title: "Discrete Mathematics"
language: "english"
contributor: "@swaminadhan"
---

# RLMCA103: Discrete Mathematics

## Course Objectives

- To give an understanding of important mathematical concepts together with a sense of
  why these concepts are important for computer science.
- To provide a foundation of set theory, Congruences, Counting techniques and Graph
  theory


### Module - 1 

-Basic Structures - Sets, Set Operations, Relations,
Classification of relations, Equivalence Relations, Closures
of Relations, Matrix Representation of Relations, Partial
Ordering, n-ary Relations, Functions


### Module - 2 

-Division Algorithm, GCD, Primes, Euclidean Algorithm,
Congruences, Properties of Congruences, Solutions of
Linear Congruences, Chinese Remainder Theorem.

### Module - 3

-Permutations, Circular Permutations, Combinations,
Combinations with repetition, Binomial Theorem,
Pigeonhole Principle, Principle of Inclusion and exclusion

### Module - 4

-Generalization of Principle of Inclusion and Exclusion, First
Order Linear Recurrence Relation, Second Order Linear
homogeneous Recurrence Relations with Constant
coefficients, Non Homogeneous Recurrence Relation,
Divide-and-Conquer Algorithms and Recurrence Relations

### Module - 5

-Graphs and Graph Models, Graph Terminology and Special
Types of Graphs, Representing Graphs and Graph
Isomorphism, Connectivity, Euler and Hamilton Paths,
Shortest-Path Problems, Planar Graphs, Graph Coloring
-Graphs, Directed Graph, Multigraph, Connected graph,
Graph Isomorphism, Euler circuit and trail, Fleury's
Algorithm, Planar and NonPlanar Graphs, Bipartite Graph,
Kuratowski's Theorem(without proof), Cut-set, Hamiton
path and cycle.

### Module - 6

-Logic - Propositional Logic, Applications of Propositional
Logic, Propositional Equivalences, Predicates and
Quantifiers, Nested Quantifiers, Rules of inference.


## References

-C. Liu, “Elements of Discrete Mathematics:A Computer Oriented Approach”,
McGraw-Hill, 4th Edition (2012)
-David M. Burton, “Elementary Number Theory”, McGraw-Hill, 7th Edition (2012).
-Y.N. Singh, ”Discrete Mathematical Structures “, Wiley India Pvt. Ltd (2010)
-Swapan Kumar Chakroborthy ,Bikash Kanthi Sarkar, “Discrete Mathematics “, Oxford
University Press (2010).
-Ralph P Grimaldi, “Discrete and Computational Mathematics:An applied
introduction”, Pearson Education, 5th Edition, (2007).
-R.K Bisht and H.S Dhami, “Discrete Mathematics “, Oxford University Press, 1st
Edition (2015)



