---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "mca"
version: "2019"
semester: 1
course_code: "RLMCA107"
course_title: "Principles of Management"
language: "english"
contributor: "@swaminadhan"
---

# RLMCA107: Principles of Management 

## Course Objectives

- To develop ability to critically analyze and evaluate a variety of management practices.
- To be able to mirror existing practices or to generate their own innovative management
  competencies, required for today's complex and global workplace
- To understand and apply a variety of management and organisational theories in practice


### Module - 1 

-Introduction to Management:Basic Managerial Concepts,
Levels of management, Managerial Skills, Managerial roles
Decision Making- Concept, types of decision, decision
making process.
-Management functions-Planning, Organising, Staffing,
Directing and Controlling.

### Module - 2 

-Early Contributions in Management:Management
thought - Classical approach, scientific management,
contributions of Taylor, Gilbreths, Fayol’s 14 principles of
management. Human relation approach - contribution of Elton Mayo
Systems approach,  organization as an open system and
Contingency approach


### Module - 3

-Planning:Nature and importance of planning, types of
plans - Steps in planning, Levels of planning - The Planning
Process - MBO definition and process, SWOT Analysis,
importance

### Module - 4

-Organising :Nature of organizing, Departmentation -
need and importance, span of control in management,
factors affecting span of management.
Organisation structure - Formal and informal, Types of
organization structure line, line and staff, functional,
divisional, project, matrix, free form, virtual.
Delegation of authority, Steps in delegation and Principles
of delegation

### Module - 5

-Staffing and related HRD Functions:meaning,
nature, staffing process, Job analysis and manpower
planning, job description and job specification,
Recruitment & selection, selection process, tests and
interviews.
Training and development - concept and methods,
Performance appraisal- concept and methods.

### Module - 6

-Directing and Controlling:Supervision, Motivation -
significance, motivational theories - Maslow's need
hierarchy.
-Basic control process - control as a feedback system.
Quality engineering, quality control, control chart (basic
concepts), Introduction to ISO 9000 and 14000 standards,
TQM, Six Sigma concepts, Bench marking, Introduction to
marketing, marketing mix, Product Life cycle.


## References

-Gary Dessler, Biju Varkkey, “Human Resourse Management”, Pearson Education
India, 14th Edition
-Harold Koontz and Heinz Weihrich, “Essentials of Management”, McGraw Hill
Education, 10th Edition (2015).
-L M Prasad, “Principles of Management”, Sultan Chand & Sons, 8th Edition (2010)
-Peter F Drucker, “The Practice of Management”, Butterworth-Heinemann publication,
2nd Edition (2007)
-Tripathi, “Principles of Management”, McGraw Hill Education, 5th Edition (2012)



