---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "mca"
version: "2019"
semester: 1
course_code: "RLMCA109"
course_title: "Digital Fundamentals"
language: "english"
contributor: "@swaminadhan"
---

# RLMCA109: Digital Fundamentals 

## Course Objectives

- To introduce the foundations of computer hardware
- To introduce digital electronics


### Module - 1 

Introduction of number systems - Binary, Decimal and
Hexadecimal- Conversions. Arithmetic operations on
binary numbers, Representation of signed numbers - 1's
compliment and 2s compliment - Representation of floating
point numbers - BCD representation


### Module - 2 

-Logic gates and Boolean algebra - Basic gates - AND, OR,
NOT, NAND, NOR, XOR - their symbols and truth tables.
Boolean algebra - Basic laws and theorems - Boolean
functions - truth table - minimization of Boolean function
using K map method, Realization using logic gates and
universal gates

### Module - 3

-Combinational Circuits - Basic ideas about combinational
circuits - Half adder - Full Adder, Parallel binary adder,
Subtracter, Decoders, Encoders, Multiplexers,
Demultiplexers, Parity bit generator

### Module - 4

-Sequential circuit - Basic ideas about sequential logic,
Clocking, Flip flops RS, JK D and T flip flops, edge
triggering , level triggering.

### Module - 5

-Sequential circuit - Basic ideas about sequential logic,
Clocking, Flip flops RS, JK D and T flip flops, edge
triggering , level triggering.

### Module - 6

-Introduction of Computers - Overview of PC architecture -
Basic components of a computer - PC hardware –
Motherboards - Expansion boards -Specifications of
Personal computers. 
-Introduction to single board computers - Arduino -
architecture - Introduction to Arduino environment. Writing
simple programs for blinking an LED, Input from an
external switch, fading an LED, serial monitor and
debugging.
-Raspberry pi:Introduction to Raspberry - Architecture,
versions, Software installation and configuration.

## References

-Mano, “Digital Design- With an Introduction to Verilog HDL”, Pearson Education, 5th
Edition (2014)
-Morris Mano, “Digital logic and Computer design”, Pearson Education, 1st Edition
(2004).
-Morris Mano, “Logic and Computer Design Fundamentals”,4th Edition (2013)
-Nisan & Schocken, “The Elements of Computing Systems”, MIT Press (2008)


