---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "mca"
version: "2019"
semester: 1
course_code: "RLMCA133"
course_title: "Applied Statistics Lab"
language: "english"
contributor: "@swaminadhan"
---

# RLMCA133: Applied Statistics Lab

## Course Objectives

- To introduce modern statistical tools
- To prepare students for big data analysis course

### Exercise - 1 

Visualizing Data
Tables, charts and plots. Visualising Measures of Central Tendency, Variation,
and Shape. Box plots, Pareto diagrams. How to find the mean median
standard deviation and quantiles of a set of observations.
Students may experiment with real as well as artificial data sets.


### Exercise  - 2 

Probability Distributions.
Set operations, simulation of various properties. Bays’ rule. Generate and
Visualize Discrete and continuous distributions using the statistical
environment. Demonstration of CDF and PDF uniform and normal, binomial
Poisson distributions. Students are expected to generate artificial data using the
chosen statistical environment and explore various distribution and its
properties. Various parameter changes may be studied.

### Exercise - 3

Random samples.
How to generate random numbers. Study how to select a random sample with
replacement from normal and uniform distribution. Students can use the built in
functions to explore random sample selection.

### Exercise - 4

Study of binomial distribution. Plots of density and distribution functions.
Normal approximation to the Binomial distribution. Central limit theorem

### Exercise - 5

Study of confidence intervals. How to compute confidence intervals for the
mean when the standard deviation is known.

### Exercise - 6

How to perform tests of hypotheses about the mean when the variance is
known.
How to compute the p-value. Explore the connection between the critical
region, the test statistic, and the p-value

### Exercise - 7

How to find quartiles of the t-distribution. How to perform a significance test
for testing the mean of a population with unknown standard deviation.

### Exercise - 8

Compare populations means from two Normal distributions with unknown
variance
Tests of Hypotheses for One Proportion
Tests of Hypotheses for Comparing Two Proportions

### Exercise - 9

How to calculate the correlation between two variables. How to make scatter
plots. Use the scatterplot to investigate the relationship between two variables

### Exercise - 10

Find the least-squares regression line. How to calculate and plot the residuals

## References

-Dr. Mark Gardener, ”Beginning R:The Statistical Programming Language”,
Wiley (2013)
-Gnuu PSPP Team, “GNU PSPP Reference Manual”, Samurai Media Limited
(2015)
-Jared P Lander, “R for everyone”, Pearson education, 1st Edition (2014). 


