---
country: "India"
university: "KTU"
branch: "CSE"
version: "2019-23"
semester: 2
course_code: "EST110"
course_title: "Engineering Graphics"
language: "English"
contributor: "@AVA-NTHIKA14"
---

# EST110: Engineering Graphics

## Course Outcomes

* CO 1: Draw the projection of points and lines located in different quadrants.  
* CO 2: Prepare multiview orthographic projections of objects by visualizing them in different positions.  
* CO 3: Draw sectional views and develop surfaces of a given object.  
* CO 4: Prepare pictorial drawings using the principles of isometric and perspective projections to visualize objects in three dimensions.  
* CO 5: Convert 3D views to orthographic views.  
* CO 6: Obtain multiview projections and solid models of objects using CAD tools.

## Course Content

### Module 1

**Introduction**: Relevance of technical drawing in engineering field. Types of lines, Dimensioning, BIS code of practice for technical drawing.  
**Orthographic projection of Points and Lines**: Projection of points in different quadrants, Projection of straight lines inclined to one plane and inclined to both planes. Trace of line. Inclination of lines with reference planes. True length of line inclined to both the reference planes.

### Module 2

**Orthographic projection of Solids**: Projection of simple solids such as Triangular, Rectangular, Square, Pentagonal and Hexagonal Prisms, Pyramids, Cone and Cylinder. Projection of solids in simple position including profile view. Projection of solids with axis inclined to one of the reference planes and with axis inclined to both reference planes.

### Module 3

**Sections of Solids**: Sections of Prisms, Pyramids, Cone, Cylinder with axis in vertical position and cut by different section planes. True shape of the sections. Also locating the section plane when the true shape of the section is given.  
**Development of Surfaces**: Development of surfaces of the above solids and solids cut by different section planes. Also finding the shortest distance between two points on the surface.

### Module 4

**Isometric Projection**: Isometric View and Projections of Prisms, Pyramids, Cone, Cylinder, Frustum of Pyramid, Frustum of Cone, Sphere, Hemisphere and their combinations.

### Module 5

**Perspective Projection**: Perspective projection of Prisms and Pyramids with axis perpendicular to the ground plane, axis perpendicular to picture plane.  
**Conversion of Pictorial Views**: Conversion of pictorial views into orthographic views.

## References

1. Bhatt, N.D., *Engineering Drawing*, Charotar Publishing House Pvt. Ltd.  
2. John, K.C., *Engineering Graphics*, Prentice Hall India Publishers.  
3. Anilkumar, K.N., *Engineering Graphics*, Adhyuth Narayan Publishers.  
4. Agrawal, B. and Agrawal, C.M., *Engineering Drawing*, Tata McGraw Hill Publishers.  
5. Benjamin, J., *Engineering Graphics*, Pentex Publishers, 3rd Edition, 2017.  
6. Duff, J.M. and Ross, W.A., *Engineering Design and Visualisation*, Cengage Learning.  
7. Kulkarni, D.M., Rastogi, A.P., and Sarkar, A.K., *Engineering Graphics with AutoCAD*, PHI.  
8. Luzadder, W.J. and Duff, J.M., *Fundamentals of Engineering Drawing*, PHI.  
9. Varghese, P.I., *Engineering Graphics*, V.I.P. Publishers.  
10. Venugopal, K., *Engineering Drawing and Graphics*, New Age International Publishers.
